Everything in heaven and earth, in fact, conspired to keep me at home, and more powerfully than anything else my own ideas about travelling, the philosophy of which is summed up in the famous fable of the Two Pigeons. . 

The search for happiness by a systematic change 
of place was already vain in the eyes of the wise 
man before the invention of railroads, but since that 
invention it has become altogether an illusion. Now 
I profess the doctrine that whoever has a nest ought 
to stay there with his little brood. Misfortune is a 
keen-eyed eagle which hovers over the forest and 
pounces upon defenceless little ones. And has not 
La Fontaine said 

' L'absence est le plus grand des maux.' 

And yet on the 20th of September the said Manouia 
weighed anchor at five o'clock in the evening, 
carrying among her passengers Prince Roland 
Bonaparte, his secretary M. Vincent Bonnaud, his 
librarian M. Escard, and your humble servant, his 
poet. The little company of excursionists was 
completed by a photographer, M. Philippon of 
Versailles, armed to the teeth with his engines of 
1 The French Bedlam. 



 



Introduction 3 

reproduction, by M. Pascal Sinibaldi, the Prince's 
huntsman, and lastly by M. Charles Clement, his 
valet de chambre. 

Two guns, one belonging to M. Vincent Bonnaud, 
the other to M. Pascal Sinibaldi, both of whom 
were born in Corsica — the former at Sartene, the 
latter at Calvi — were to serve for our defence, and if 
need be for our commissariat. They threatened 
alike the bandits and the partridges. M. Escard 
had a dagger, the photographer a swordstick, true 
and unmistakable, to which he owed certain mis- 
adventures. For my part I had my natural gaiety, 
and Charles all the umbrellas ! 

As for the Prince, he was sufficiently protected 
among the Corsicans by the name he bears, one of 
his great-uncles having made it rather illustrious 
towards the end of the last century and the be- 
ginning of this by certain victories, of which people 
still talk sometimes, not only at Ajaccio, this uncle's 
birthplace, but in other parts of the planet. Though, 
as for his Code ! But let us proceed. 

On the 20th of September, then, I was travelling 
towards this old Cyrnos of the Greeks, which I had 
never thought much about until I found myself 
on this steamer. What I was going to do I had 
hardly considered. Among the many paradoxical 
ideas of which my jovial philosophy is mother and 



 



 

nurse, that of being the discoverer of a French 
department, about which some i 500 volumes perhaps 
have been already published, was certainly not one 
. which could have come to me, even from the moon. 
But Providence disguised as Chance often leads the 
dance of Destiny. 

Before we started I was quite content with the 
ethnographic notions about Corsica which Colomba 
supplies to the majority of civilised people. 
MlrimeVs celebrated novel is a very complete 
account in a pictorial form of the manners and 
character and physiological tendencies of the little 
people who have raised banditism to the dignity of 
an institution. This romance of the vendetta will 
remain the Iliad, the Odyssey, and the Batracho- 
myomachia of these islanders whom France has 
annexed but not amalgamated, and flatters herself 
she has, if not Frenchified, at least dis-Itahanised. 
Literature has produced nothing more lifelike than 
Colomba. Its accuracy is surprising even at this 
day ; and as the work dates from 1830 one sees at 
once what great progress has been realised — in fifty- 
eight years ! — by our glorious administration in 
thine isle, O Napoleon ! 

Perhaps, my Emperor, it was the demonstration 
of this consoling truth which was the object of the 
expedition organised by thy grand-nephew. Perhaps 



 



Introduction 5 

he desired to make it on the spot. ' What progress 
has Corsica made since Colombo ? ' said he to himself 
as he awoke one morning. ' I must go and see into 
that with a poet.' 

The answer is given in this book. 

Corsica since the time of Colombo has progressed 
as far as — Colombo ! But we must not anticipate. 

At that time I not only was not acquainted 
with this amiable Prince Roland, who was to become 
my friend, I had never even seen him. Absolutely 
without interest in that class of politics which may 
be called domestic, I could not have told exactly 
what relation he bore, in that innumerable family 
of the Bonapartes, to the terrible phantom of St. 
Helena. Of course I found out all about it at once, 
and blessed the lucky chance which was to bring me 
into relations with the heir of the liberal, or rather 
republican, branch of the tree. What a pleasant lot 
it is to be courtier to a prince to whom you can say 
anything that comes into your head, even that 
Marat had good qualities, while he replies that 
he had some of the best. So from the first day I 
became an enthusiastic Rolandist, and I strongly 
recommend this political party. And the voyage 
itself was charming. 

But all this does not explain how it came about 
that a literary artist got mixed up in an expedition 



 



 

of this scientific character ; and in the group, equipped 
as I have described them, my part is scarcely defined. 
Well, this is how it came about. As for Corsica, 
thanks to Colomba, I had nothing to learn about it 
except one thing, which none of the 1500 books 
which have been published about the island have 
touched upon, and that one thing was 

The Chase of the Mouflon. 

The chase of the mouflon was for me what the 
chase of the ' chastre ' had been for that Marseillais 
M£ry! 

You remember that wild chase which carries the 
hunter right into the Caucasus. The ' chastre,' an 
animal so exceedingly rare that it does not exist at 
all, was not more fascinating to the cynegetic imagi- 
nation of M£ry than the mouflon was dazzling to 
mine. I believed in the mouflon. He inhabited the 
Corsica of my dreams. I could not call up to 
myself the picture of the macchia without a group 
of mouflons showing their corkscrew horns over the 
top of the bushes. I even introduced one into 
Colomba ; may the late M. Merim^e forgive me ! 
But this book shall tell the truth respecting the 
mouflon of Corsica, and alas! it is a discouraging 
truth. The mouflon is a production of the Zoological 



 



Introduction 7 

Gardens. They manufacture it there, perhaps by 
some infamous union of rams and she-goats. But 
more of this anon. 

However, I was at that time as full of faith in the 
mouflon as Buffon himself ; and it was with my mind 
full of this apocalyptic animal that one morning E 
entered the Cafe de la Paix in the Boulevard des 
Capucines and called for breakfast. 

The waiters of the Cafe de la Paix are most 
attentive to their customers, and always inquire 
immediately what they will be pleased to take, for 
they have everything. 

' Some mouflon,' I said at once, without stopping 
to think. 

They turned pale. And after a crossfire of 
glances, silent but eloquent, between my table and 
the counter, one of the superintendents came forward 
and informed me solemnly, 

1 We have none left.' 

That is the canonical expression for such a short- 
coming ; a waiter of the highest style would use it 
on the raft of the Medusa. But my appetite was 
so keen that I understood him literally. 

'What could they have left if they had no 
mouflon left, a thing which nobody asks for ? ' 

The logic of this thought, uttered half aloud, 
seemed forcibly to strike a gentleman who was 



 



 

breakfasting at a neighbouring table, and even drew 
from him one of those frank and contagious laughs 
which denote the boulevardier with his keen sense of 
the ridiculous. 

He was a man of about fifty, with regular, 
refined features, a pleasant expression, an air of good 
breeding, without any stiffness and with a courteous 
manner, in whom I recognised a French officer in the 
guise of a civilian. The uniform, like the cassock, 
models after one and the same type, all who wear 
or have worn epaulettes, and have served their 
country. 

' Excuse me, sir,' he said, ' for interfering between 
the waiter and you, but I am a Corsican, and your 
idea of asking for a cutlet of mouflon for breakfast 
sent me back in imagination to my own country, 
which I have not visited for thirty years. I saw the 
light first at Sartene where the mouflon abounds — 
and even exists ! I have eaten it ! You may be 
sure that if there were any to be had at the Cafe" de 
la Paix I should have some at this moment on my 
plate. In default of mouflon I advise you to try 
some Seine gudgeon ; it is excellent here, worthy 
even of the fork of — Caliban.' 1 

' What ! ' I began, blushing up ; ' you know ? ' 
' Why, who else, in these gloomy times, would 
1 The author's pseudonym in the Figaro, 



 



Introduction 9 

think of wanting to taste mouflon on the boulevards 
of Paris ? You have betrayed yourself ! ' 

And this was how I made acquaintance with my 
friend M. Vincent Bonnaud, whom I shall love 
(as Jean des Entommeures loved Panurge) all my 
life. 

Is it necessary to add that in a moment we were 
sitting side by side, breakfasting together ? So I had 
got hold of a man who had seen mouflons, one even 
of their fellow-countrymen, for there are none left 
except in Corsica — and in Greece, they say. But I 
do not believe in Greece, since reading Edmond 
About's Rot des Montagues. 

My new friend told me the whole history of the 
mouflon : he described it from life ; he opened up to 
me its habits, its instincts, its character ; he sketched 
its spiral horns, and imitated its ferocious bleat. At 
four o'clock I was still listening to him. 

' The mouflon,' he said, ' is a very stupid and 
very intelligent animal — very wild and very easily 
domesticated — very pretty and remarkably ugly — 
just as you read one author or another and believe 
them for the moment. He has a great deal of the 
goat in him, and as much of the sheep, and in 
fact very little of either. If he were clothed in 
wool he would be almost a ram ; but he plays 
naturalists the trick of dressing in hair and thereby 



 



io 

approaches closely to the goat, without however 
being like him, for he has the other's head, as 
Button remarks. 

' As for his manners, there is very little known 
about them. Those whom the hunters kill have no 
time to be studied. Those whom they miss don't 
come to tell us. They walk about on inaccessible 
peaks — that is the goat side of their character; 
and they stay there to graze — that is the sheep 
side. You are following me ? ' 

' As well as I can,' I said, with a doubtful cough. 
' But what is your own opinion about them, you, their 
fellow-countryman ? ' 

1 In my opinion he is a sheep, a wild sheep, but 
still a sheep.' 

And the facetious Corsican started off again. 

' One day at Sartene — I am talking of thirty years 
ago — they told me there was one of these doubtful 
beasts on the mountain. I am, without any vanity, 
the best hunter I know — after you, of course ; but at 
that time I should have been ready to give Nimrod 
ten points out of eleven. Well, I took my gun, and 
whistling to the first dog that passed I set off to 
climb the macckia. I must tell you I had only one 
cartridge with me. Why should I have two, as 
there was only one mouflon ? As for the dog, I 
invited him for the sake of having somebody to chat 



 



Introduction 1 1 

with on the road and also to second me after- 
wards. So having arrived after an hour or two's 
clambering at the cavern where the mouflon of Sartenc 
resided, we began proceedings, the dog and I, by 
taking a little rest. Nothing was stirring yet. I 
light a cigarette and lie down flat on my face, and 
make a sign to the dog to do the same. This I do 
for the purpose of taking observations. The rascal ! 
If you had seen that mouflon turning round and 
round in the cavern. In front you would have 
called him a ram, and from behind a goat. But I 
must first get him out of his lair. I kill only in the 
open air and at five hundred paces ; in a room, 
never 1 So I addressed myself to the dog and 
intimated my desire that he should dislodge the 
game. He understood me, started off, and I saw 
him arrive at the entrance to the cavern, when he sat 
down, began to thump the ground with his tail, and 
look at me queerly. Far from thinking of violating 
' the mouflon's domicile, he seemed to have established 
himself there as its guardian.' 

' What ! ' I said stupidly, ' as its guardian ? 
The guardian of the mouflon ? ' 

' Yes ! it was only then I discovered that in the 
distraction of the moment I had brought out hunting 
a dog who did not belong to the business— in fact, a 
sheep-dog.' 



 



1  

' Well ! ' I stammered. 

' Well, the sheep-dog does not hunt sheep ; quite 
the contrary.' 

' And therefore ? ' 

' Therefore, the mouflon is a sheep, a wild sheep, 
but a sheep ! ' 

1 Evidently,' I concluded. ' And yet they have 
none at the Cafe" de la Paix, where they have every- 
thing.' 

My partner at the game of knife and fork looked 
at me. 

1 Have you really set your heart on eating it?' he 
said. 

A sigh was my only response. 

The mouflon hunter took out of the pocket of his 
greatcoat an elegant Russia leather pocket-book and 
turned over the leaves without speaking. He seemed 
to be looking for some memorandum. When he 
had found it he asked me to give him my address, 
and wrote it with a gold pencil by the side of the 
memorandum. Then having put away the pocket- 
book he called for two glasses of chartreuse, and took 
up his story again in these words : 

' When I returned to Sartene with my mou- 
flon ' 

' What ! ' I said, interrupting him. ' You did kill 
the mouflon?' 



 



Introduction 1 3 

1 People don't kill the mouflon. It is not game, it 
is merely a wild animal.' 

' You said it was a sheep.' 

1 A wild sheep, my dear sir ! Besides, there is no 
part of it except the horns that is good for anything. 
The rest is worth nothing, musty goat ! So it is only 
taken alive.' 

' You had your gun with you, however ? ' 

' Like every good Corsican, of course. But for 
this kind of chase the gun is only used for making 
a noise among the hills ! ' 

' Go on,' I said ; ' I will not interrupt again ; I 
resign myself. 1 

' All naturalists will tell you that the mouflon is 
afraid of thunder. I will not swear that he makes 
the sign of the cross when it thunders, but certainly 
he runs away. 

' The mouflon hunt is based upon this discovery. 
His cowardice is quite invincible, and although he is a 
most excellent head of a family, a faithful husband and 
good father, as soon as he hears the tempest rage he 
leaves all his belongings and runs away. The female, 
the mouflonne, follows his example immediately and 
disappears after him. 

' The consequence is that the little sucklings are 
found deserted, and you can take them with your 
hand. The gun therefore, is used to produce an 



 



 

imitation of the thunder which frightens them so. 
Now you know what a reverberation the discharge 
of a gun in the mountain gorges produces, and what 
formidable echoes it awakens. I therefore had no- 
thing to do but to fire off my single cartridge among 
the echoing cliffs, and the mouflon rushed out of the 
cavern. 

' He dashed headlong across the macchia by a way 
which seemed none the less giddy that the sheep- 
dog, still mistaking his species, had set off in pursuit, 
seeking to bring him back to some imaginary flock. 
They vanished together in this manner, one biting, 
the other butting, and I was quit of them. 

1 It was the will of Nimrod that my mouflon should 
be a mouflonne. She was a widow. She had three 
children. I entered the cavern, and the charming 
little beasts came round me at once with the utmost 
confidence. 

' I had brought some pink ribbon with me. The 
eldest had already two delicious little horns sprout- 
ing, like sea-shells, and his ash-coloured hairy coat 
curled charmingly. I attached a favour to his neck 
and christened him Nemorino. He followed me to 
Sartene. 

1 Perhaps you will be curious to know why I left 
the other two behind ? Well, I left them because they 
were females.' 



 



Introduction 1 5 

' Ah ! ' I said with fresh interest, feeling that I 
was on the track of some curious thing in the natural 
history of the mouflon. 

' In fact, I was sure that I should see the two lady 
mouflons again some day or other, grown up and 
beautiful ! You will see I was not mistaken. 

f Nemorino lived with me for a year at Sartene. 
He became a child of the house. His gentleness 
was a proverb. I used to fasten some coppers between 
his horns and send him to the shop to buy me my 
tobacco. 

' Spring came round, and it became impossible 
to keep Nemorino. He would go. When he saw his 
own reflection in the glass he would bleat piteously. 
One day he rushed at his own image in a mirror 
and shattered it. I let him go. He returned to 
the mountain and I heard no more of him. 

' But at the end of the following autumn I was 
awakened one night by a drumming at my door, 
It was Nemorino at the head of&smalak of mouflons. 
He had married his two sisters, and was come 
back with them and their little ones to take up his 
winter quarters with me!' 1 

1 ' You find (in Corsica) a species of little goat called " mouffoli " 
about the size of a roebuck : it is a charming little creature with a well' 
formed body, a finely- marked coal, vivacious and very agile. This 
animal has horns like a ram and a very thick skin ; he is very shy and 
lives on the higher mountains ; he is so agile that it is difficult to get 



 



1  

Now one does not listen to a narrative like this 
without retaining a lifelong recollection of it, and 
without conceiving for the narrator a friendship 
which nothing on earth can dissolve : that was what 
happened to me. 

M. Vincent Bonnaud became from that time 
necessary to me, and we met as often as possible at 
that Cafe de la Paix, where the last boulevardiers of 
the decadence are wont to breakfast, men who have 
no illusions, and who know that the whole of life is 
hyperbole and paradox. 

Then the sea-bathing season separated us. I set 
out for my favourite little lonely beach, and had 
forgotten the fallacious poem of Nemorino, when I 
received a letter from my sporting naturalist, inviting 
me to accompany him on which 
he was organising in Corsica. 

' My notebook,' he said, ' bears witness to the 
desire you feel to make the acquaintance of, study 
closely, and perhaps immortalise that fabulous 
animal, the pride of our mountains. He is waiting 
for you ! Come ! Prince Roland Bonaparte, whose 

near him. He leaps gieat distances from rock to rock, and if he is 
pursued to the edge of a rock from which he cannot spring to another, 
he throws himself down and has the address to fall on his horns. 
However, you can easily tame him if you take him young. M. de 
MarbiEuf, the commander of the French troops in Corsica, had one at 
his house.' — Description de rile de Corse, by the Sieur Bellin, naval 
engineer, 1769. 



 



Introduction 1 7 

secretary I am, is charmed at the opportunity I am 
procuring him of climbing the Corsican Alps in your 
company ; and I am congratulating myself on the 
chance of being able to introduce you to one of the 
most intelligent, the most learned, and the most 
amiable men of that party which is the least cause 
of division amongst us.' 

There was but one answer to make, and I 
made it. 

I set out on. 



 



CHAPTER I 

AJACCIO AND ITS CANTON 

The Manouia — Corsica at dawn — The perfume of the island — 
Smoke— Ajaccio — The Inkstand— A statue imagined — Possessed 
— The Casa Bonaparte — Its situation — Portrait of Ltetitia — The 
street with the red capsicums — Paris journals —The scandal of the 
Legion of Honour— At the Cafe" du Roi Jerome— The Vendetta— A 
conversation on banditism — Smooth hair and curly hair — Justice — 
Mouflon insight. 

There are three ways of going to Corsica and also 
of returning ; I mean three services of steamers will 
take you there. One from Nice to Calvi which makes 
the passage once a week ; the boats are second-rate. 
Another, the Italian line, connects Bastia and 
Leghorn. The third, which is the most used, starts 
from Marseilles every day, I think, at five o'clock in 
the evening, and reaches Ajaccio about seven in the 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 1 9 

morning. It is under the control of the Compagnie 
des Transatl antiques, which runs superb boats, com- 
manded by excellent captains. 

The Manouia is one of these boats. I passed 
the night of the 20th September 1887 in it, and 
slept as one would sleep in Paradise — that is to say, 
if the saints do sleep, which as yet we do not know. 
However that may be, I was up in the morning at six 
o'clock, fresh, cheerful, and with all my senses on the 
stretch to see and hear and breathe Corsica. 

It soon came in view, a faint shadow on the sea, 
a rosy cloud, jagged above, and like one of those sugar 
cakes which you see melting in the heat of the lamps 
and running down into the silver dish. 

All the gulfs On the western coast — the Gulf of 
Galeria, the Gulf of Porto overhung by the Monte 
Rotondo, the Gulf of Sagona which reveals the Monte 
d'Oro — one by one spread themselves out in the 
floating mists of sunrise, and the promontories thrust 
out their red beaks between the lapis lazuli sky and 
the turquoise waters. It looks like an island of 
sardonyx bordered with coral. 

No sign of life, not a sail in these solitary bays, 
where the tunny fish and the porpoises are left more 
undisturbed than at the Pole. 

The fine beaches are neglected even by fishermen ; 
the fiords with their yellow sands blazing like brass 



 



 

basins are deserted ; ports where whole fleets might 
shelter at ease are left useless. For the Corsican 
inhabits the mountains ; he is no lover of the sea ; 
he will always prefer a horse to a boat, a gun to a 
net, and hunting to fishing. The bays remain deserted 
and must content themselves with idle reflections on 
old Atlantic Tethys' delusive mirror. But the sun 
arose and the outlines became defined. On the 
scarlet sides of the promontories over which towered 
white peaks, the boundless herbage of the macchia 
rose in terraces of shining green velvet. 

The wind shifted from north-east to east, and 
there for the first time I perceived the famous 
perfume, that extraordinary perfume of which 
Napoleon could never speak without emotion, which 
he could recognise at a distance of six leagues, and 
which the wind wafted to him once more at St. Helena. 

It is not easy to render a smell in words, and 
language fails me here. But, on the other hand, 
simply to say that Corsica smells nice will not 
perhaps to sensitive nostrils give sufficient information 
as to its aroma. So let us essay to subject the 
reader to the olfactory illusion, and may the god of 
Rimmel come to the aid of my Muse. 

Now just as the soupe aux quaire-s-herbes has four 
herbs, so the macchia, which is a kind of pocket 
virgin forest, is composed of eight plants — the cistus, 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 2 1 

the lentiscus, the arbutus, the myrtle, the heath, the 
rosemary, the juniper, and the wild olive. And that 
is all, for the bandit does not count : he has his own 
proper perfume. See ethnography ! 

These eight plants, when the divine sun begins to 
stir their juices, mingle their diverse exhalations into 
a terrible elixir something like a peppery resin, which 
is the musk of the island. In its configuration in 
the Mediterranean Sea Corsica somewhat resembles 
a scent-bottle of which Cape Corso would be the 
neck. I introduce a parenthesis here. 

(From this it follows that what is called 'taking 
to the macckia ' is simply the act of retiring from a 
disorganised and rotten society to live in a sweet- 
smelling wood. Perhaps, therefore, the bandit is 
merely a man who is wisely making his escape from 
the evil odour of the law, and of all those who are 
the incarnation of it, notably the gendarmes whose 
resounding boots smell so strong of authority and 
tan. Banditism is thus a mere question of scents. 
I am the first to understand this matter, and so I 
make the revelation with some timidity.) Here I 
end my parenthesis. 

A peppery resin, that is pretty much the sum of 
it, or rather a gingery resin, but laden also, when the 
breeze blows over the Corsican moors, with faint 
wafts of lavender, thyme, and mint. 



 



22 A Wild Skeep Chase 

You will laugh at the comparison I am going to 
give you, but gastronomes will appreciate it. In 
some vast and airy country kitchens you may find 
certain courts-bouillons set aside to cool, simmering 
in the warm air of the place, and emitting from 
under their pot-lids volatile odours and essences which 
call to mind the scent of Corsica. I do not know if 
I make myself understood. 

If not, it is easy for those who wish thoroughly 
to comprehend this celebrated perfume, and to whom 
words on paper represent nothing, to regale them- 
selves with it without leaving Paris. They have 
only to send to Marseilles for a basket of Corsican 
partridges, or better still for some of those blackbirds 
of the island which feed on juniper berries and the 
starry seed of the lentiscus, and so absorb into them- 
selves the delicious effluvia of the macckia. When 
they have finished their breakfast they will know as 
much as Napoleon about it. 

' This smells of the mouflon, does it not ? ' 
said suddenly a lively voice behind me. And 
we fellow-travellers exchanged a morning saluta- 
tion. 

The Manouia was at the moment passing the 
headland of Carghese by the Gulf of Sagona, in sight 
of the frowning Monte d'Oro which dominates the 
whole range of these Alps, 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 23 

' I see one ! ' cried Prince Roland gaily, ' over 
there ! there ! ' 

' I can hear him ! ' said M. Vincent Bonnaud. 
' He is sharpening his horns on a stone. 1 

' I can smell him ! ' added M. Escard. 

' Shall I fire ? ' asked Pascal Sinibaldi, with his 
rifle already at his shoulder. 

' No ! you would miss at this distance. Monte 
d'Oro is thirty miles off — and the boat is rolling ! ' 

But while we were exchanging these lively Tar- 
tarinesque sallies, a smoke began to rise among the 
mountains, curling upwards and forming little clouds 
which grew thicker and thicker. 

' It is the macchia on fire,' said the captain, 
throwing us the remark as he passed ; ' the Cor- 
sicans are at their field work ! ' 

And such is in fact the summary method of 
husbandry, belonging to a pre-Deucalion time, which 
the islanders practise still for clearing and preparing 
ground for cultivation. 

When September comes they set the moors on 
fire, and all the hilltops in the island send forth 
flames which, like beacons, seem to be signalling the 
return of Napoleon, who according to many of them 
is not dead. 

Of Ajaccio itself there is nothing to be said that 
tourists have not repeated a hundred times already 



 



24 A Wild Sheei> Chase 

to utter weariness. The town is as wanting in 
character as in importance, and the Gulf only is fine. 
That indeed is magnificent, as seen from the Place 
Diamant, where is to be found the most grotesque 
monument which it has ever been given to me to 
contemplate in the whole course of my travels. 
Even in Corsica they have nicknamed it the ' Ink- 
stand,' although it was set up to 'the glory of the 
Bonaparte family — and it perfectly justifies its name. 
The erection, which we owe, it seems, to the genius 
of Viol let -le-Duc, is just like a colossal inkstand : it 
represents Napoleon on horseback in the dress of 
a Roman consul on a square pedestal, at the four 
corners of which his four brothers, Joseph, Louis, 
Lucien, and Jerome, in the character of lictors ! march 
motionless to posterity. I do not know why, but 
the effect is perfectly irresistible. No doubt deifi- 
cation for four at least of these modern heroes, whom 
one thinks of more naturally in boots than in the 
peplum, seems an exaggeration, and it is this feeling 
which causes the disrespectful hilarity with which the 
gravest man is seized when he is face to face with 
this erection. A sorry architect was that learned 
man Viollet-le-Duc ! The 'Inkstand' is his master- 
piece. It is only fair to add, perhaps, that the 
surprise comes in part from a characteristic error, 
that is to say, an error in the character of the work. 



 



Ajaccio and Us Canton 25 

At Ajaccio, the Napoleon that one comes to look 
for, and is yearning for, is the young Corsican officer, 
still an obscure subaltern, and with nothing about 
him to foretell his superhuman and terrible destiny. 
It is a petitio principti, as we say in rhetoric, to 
exhibit him prematurely as Caesar only a few steps 
from the street in which he was born, a commonplace 
street in an old Italian port, where one likes to picture 
him playing at children's games. The contrast which 
municipal pride desires to produce is not effective, or 
at least it is effective only in the same way as the 
famous metachronism ' As for us, people of the middle 
ages ! ' 

The same observation applies to the other statue 
in the Market Place, Bonaparte as first consul, presid- 
ing over the fountain. It is not in its proper place. 
It tells us nothing that we -should not know without 
the trouble of the voyage. 

One is continually wanting to exclaim to the good 
people of Ajaccio, ' But if he was a Roman he was 
not a Corsican, You should make up your minds 
one way or other — unless, indeed, you really used to 
see him walking about in his shirt ! ' 

The only possible and conceivable statue of the 
Emperor for Ajaccio to my mind would be one repre- 
senting him at the age of twelve, in the very flower 
of youth, riding one of those little fiery, vigorous 



 



 

horses which are peculiar to the island. Everything 
here has reference to the child Napoleon. 

Executed by an artist with a genius for the pictur- 
esque, free from the thraldom of stereotyped academic 
rules — such a one as M. Auguste Rodin, for example — 
it would become a kind of philosophic key for visitors 
of the island, and a natural ornament to the city. 

It is Dame JLaetitia Ramolini's marvellous child 
that we come to visit in the shadows of the Rue St. 
Charles, the boy with a pale face, flaming eyes, and 
passionate gestures, who used to make little cannons 
in his bedroom, and was already commander-in-chief 
in all the battles of his young companions. This 
Napoleon is a Corsican, and nothing but a Corsican. 
The others belong to the Continent, and when he 
entered Brienne he made his escape from you, O 
children of Paoli ! 

I impart these reflections of mine to his grand- 
nephew, who entirely agrees with me. 

There is nothing, however,at Ajaccio but Napoleon, 
even for the most furious of his detractors. I would 
defy a Lanfrey to find anything else there. The 
town indeed may be defined in this way — the memory 
of the great Corsican with houses round. 

While I was walking about I did nothing but think 
of scraps of those poems of La mar tine, Victor Hugo, 
and Barbier, on which we have all been brought up. 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 27 

' Lui, toujours lui ! ' as the Orientates says. The 
place is permanently possessed by him. The voice of 
history issues from the paving stones, and the wing 
of legend fans the bay, filling the air with solemn 
sounds. 

There was no way of rousing oneself from this 
mystic trance except by going to visit the Bonaparte 
house. 

Now see what it is in the power of this dream to 
call up ! 

This Bonaparte house no longer exists ! It was 
burnt in the lifetime of the Emperor. The one that 
people go to visit has not a stone that belongs to the 
dwelling in which he was born. It was not even re- 
built exactly on the old plan. But people go to see 
it all the same. One must. 

The English take away bits of plaster from it : 
the French speak in subdued tones within its walls : 
we photographed it ! 

But all the same it is no longer ' a wall behind 
which something has happened' ; it is the site, built 
upon anew and therefore concealed, of the house 
where the man was born. 

Well, it is very touching ! 

Who has not described this Casa Bonaparte ? 
And yet it has in itself no interest whatever. 

It is a great square town house of three stories, 



 



 

surmounted by a little turret in the form of a lantern. 
It has no ornament to attract the attention of 
the artist ; its appearance is commonplace and 
uninteresting. Above the little door by which you 



enter there is a black marble slab giving the date of 
Napoleon's birth, 15th August 1769, and that is all. 
Even this is quite new, and was probably placed 
there by the Empress Eugenie, to whom the place 
belongs. 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 29 

The old garden of the house, now enclosed by a 
railing, has been turned into a square, and pious 
visitors despoil the bushes and plants of their leaves 
with a faith which is truly British. 

As for the people of Ajaccio, are they indifferent, 
or are they tired of it all ? I do not know, but they 
appeared to me to pay very little attention to the 
worship rendered in that place to the memory of a 
very extraordinary family connected with their town. 

In September 1887 we found the birthplace and 
patrimonial dwelling of the greatest man of modern 
times let to an English family. ' Let ! ' I say — yes, 
you have read the word right ! The family occupied 
the first floor of the Casa Bonaparte, and to visit it 
we were obliged to disturb some young English ladies 
who were busy at their needle-work, while Prince 
Roland mounted the stairs to the upper story to pay 
his respects to his auntj the Princess Marianne, who 
is also a lodger of the Empress Eugenie's. 

O me ! this almost sacred dwelling-place let out 
in lodgings ! it is a rude shock, and produces in 
the philosopher who receives it an inexpressible 
sensation. Nowhere have I felt with more bitterness 
the vanity of human glory. These young English 
girls in the hero's birthplace were to me a greater 
scandal than the mice in the head of Olympian Jove, 
and I was vexed and pained even to real suffering. 



 



 

Life ignores and denies history ; it is better to be, 
even tf one ts nothing, than to have been, even if one 
was everything ; nature has more for the parasites 
of a dead oak than for the dead oak itself. 

The interior of the Casa Bonaparte is even less 
authentic than the exterior : a number of rooms 
paved with red tiles, opening on one side on a pretty 
terrace where one might spend the summer evenings, 
and on the other looking over a medley of tiled roofs 
above which rises the belfry of the cathedral. 

No furniture, except the sedan chair in which 
Lxtitia, seized with sudden pangs, was carried home 
to give birth to Napoleon. They used to show the 
tapestry of historic pattern in the room where the 
birth took place ; it is not shown now ; they do not 
even show another ! On the walls are hangings, 
evidently not contemporary, but brazening out their 
improbability ; some execrable portraits, and among 
them one of Madame Mere, of which I took a hasty 
sketch that I might compare it with Gerard's, and 
with the celebrated statue by Canova, for it seemed 
to me to have been done from the life and to have a 
look of reality. 

What else ? The little legendary cannon with 
which the child practised the art of artillery ; a little 
bed of the Louis XVI. style, and a specimen of needle- 
work put under glass. 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 3 1 

The old books which Gregorovius saw there in 
a cupboard in 1852 are there still. 1 opened them 
and recognised the books of theology, the Livy and 
the Guicaardini of which he spoke, and which come 
evidently from the collection of Cardinal Fesch. But 
I do not know why, these relics and all the others 
seem to want reality. One does not believe in them. 
Perhaps they are badly set out. If they are authentic 
they do not seem so. 

They look as if they had been thrown together in 
a hurry to receive an unexpected visit from posterity. 
I would give them all for one of the boy's shoes, 
if there were one — some old worn-out shoe kept 
by some good woman of the port, a friend of the 
family, and a simple admirer of the precocity of the 
phenomenal child. 1 

I came out from visiting this Casa Bonaparte 
very deeply stirred by the terrible personality of this 
man, a prey to the legend from which no child of 
the century can shake himself free ; and I wandered 
about in the dirty little paved streets, swarming with 
children, the wind from the harbour blowing about 



1 Would it be so difficult to form a little historical museum in this 
Casa Bonaparte at Ajaccio, to collect some objects which had really 
belonged to the Emperor, and some portraits? Even with the relics 
(where are they?) of that museum of rags, which we used to see at the 
Louvre, the greatcoat, the little hat, etc., there would be the beginning 
of a collection, and the family would give the rest, no doubt. 



 



 

the strings of red capsicums which were hanging 
from the windows. One of these little streets led me 
to the Place, in the midst of which was a fountain 
with an abundant supply of water. And over this 
fountain I saw a Napoleon of appalling gloom. 

Despondent, bent, suffering, his eyes fixed blankly 
on the ground, the emaciation of his form showing 
beneath the feeble folds of his Caesarian toga, 
dragging behind him a symbolic club as one drags 
a little dog, the unhappy Emperor seemed so heart- 
broken, so utterly heartbroken, that at first I thought 
he was jealous of General Boulanger, then in all his 
glory. 

Certainly the sculptor who produced that statue 
in the Market Place at Ajaccio did not take his 
Bonapartism gaily. The Italian artist to whom we 
owe the very nude Napoleon in the Place Saint 
Nicolas at Bastia could alone dispute the prize of 
melancholy with him. They are two remarkable 
horrors, and must have led many young women in 
Corsica to take the veil. 

The sun was setting behind the figure at Ajaccio, 
and I said to him in the language in which one 
usually addresses statues, ' What has caused you, O 
my Emperor, to be so depressed as this ? You will 
end by falling into the sea. Any one would say 
you wanted to go back to St. Helena.' 



 



Ajaccto and its Canton $$ 

Just at that moment a newsboy who was selling 
French newspapers came out of a shop close by, 
jumped across the gutter, and held out to me a 
paper containing the latest news for a halfpenny. 

' Paris scandal ! ' he croaked, for his voice was 
breaking, ' great Paris scandal ! Sale of the Legion 
of Honour ! Two generals compromised ! Five 
centimes ! ' 

And a crowd of other little newsboys rushed out 
into the town, bawling, insolent, dodging the officers 
of the garrison who wanted to pull their ears, and 
spreading the news of the great scandal all over the 
place ! 

I declare that at that moment the statue nearly 
lost its balance. I saw it reel this way and that ! 
If one of the rascals had cried the name of 
Wilson it would certainly have fallen. For of all 
hard blows that can be dealt at the Napoleonic 
structure, to traffic with the star of the brave is the 
hardest, and neither marble nor granite can resist it. 
Everything must break up and go to pieces. 

And I thought that the song was right, and that 
there are moments in immortality when it must be 
a bore indeed to be in marble. At the same time, 
by a process of reflex action doubtless, I regretted 
that I was not marble myself, for I felt it too deeply. 

Alas ! one may decline to join the Ligue des 



 



34 A Wiid Sheep Chase 

Patriotes and consequently be but a very moderate 
sort of Frenchman ; all the same such revelations as 
these are a little painful when one comes to live for 
a month or two in the macchia among honourable 
bandits who have only killed a few cousins. 

But beneath the statue of him who was the 
inventor of the whole institution, and who unhooked 
the stars from the skies that he might hang them 
on his brave men's breasts, the sensation becomes 
really acute. I recommend it to those who are weary 
of chauvinism. No Republic can make up for it. 
The fang goes deep and cannot be shaken off. It 
brings tears to one's eyes, I assure you. 

When the first emotion was over I set myself to 
reflect, as is fitting while one has time, on the acci- 
dents of life, and I soon came to the point of doubt- 
ing, yes, doubting, the truth of this great scandal. 

The Emperor had not fallen off his pedestal, and 
I could see distinctly a caravan of English people 
going along the streets where the strings of capsi- 
cums were rustling, and making for the birthplace 
of the man who had raised and could still raise a 
Legion of Honour in an army like his. 

What were these Englishmen going to see, if this 
thing was true ? 

And these thoughts came to me as I walked 
along. 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 35 

1 No, no, a hundred times no ! it is not true. 
Credulous I may be, and I allow it, but you will 
never make me believe that a man of the nineteenth 
century would give money for the sake of getting 
a decoration ! Why not ? Because the thing is 
absolutely impossible. 

' However rich you may boast of being, and how- 
ever great a fool I may choose to fancy you, there is 
one thing which no power, human or superhuman, no 
power in heaven or earth would make you do, and 
that is to take a sum of money out of your safe and 
fling it out of window. 

' The man capable of taking a sum of money and 
flinging it out of window for nothing, for fun, would 
not be a man : he would be a god : such a one does 
not exist. Now such an action as that would be less 
lunatic than for a man of our time to buy the red 
ribbon, because the red ribbon has this peculiarity 
— that it is given to any one who asks for it and 
for nothing ! 

' To say of a member of the Legion of Honour 
that he has bought his decoration is the same thing 
as saying of an Academician that he paid for his 
fauteuil with gold. A man obtains his decoration 
as a man becomes one of the Forty, in the first place 
because he has deserved it, and secondly because he 
has left no stone unturned to get it.' 



 



 

This solution, which, considering how far I was 
at the moment from the boulevards, might pass for 
a Parisian view of the matter, brought me at once 
into a region of philosophy of much wider extent, in 
which, as Montaigne would say, I soon stumbled 
upon a great ' Wherefore.' This ' Wherefore ' was 
the question of the institution itself ; the ' Wherefore ' 
of the Legion of Honour, 

' What was the good, my Emperor,' I went on, 
' of substituting for that natural motive power, known 
under the name of a sense of duty, this puerile red 
stimulus of simple vanity ? Did you think you 
could do better than nature, or find anything more 
powerful than that law of honour whose machinery 
never ceases its perpetual tick tick within ? 

' He who works for a reward works too fast and 
does not hold out long : for there is no tangible recom- 
pense for work ; it is a tree which bears its flower 
and fruit at the same time. 

' The soldier who defends his country, if by his 
courage he saves her, has no need to signify by any 
outward sign that he has saved her, because she her- 
self is the sign. You can know it by looking at him : 
he is a soldier. His joy is within ; his conscience 
leaves him at peace ; his honour flourishes in his 
own eyes. It is the same with all great duties. 

■ To decorate a man because he did his duty at 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 3 7 

the proper time and place is to suppose that he had 
some hesitation about doing it and consequently 
that he was a coward. What does your national 
order, Napoleon, give to men of honour that they 
had not before ? ' 

And I heard a marble voice replying : 
' Nothing at all. But look at those streets, down 
which those Englishmen went, and which you have 
just been walking about ; they are ugly and dirty, 
but you found something to admire in them, though 
you are a Frenchman and an artist. Just because 
of the strings of red capsicums which decorate each 
house. They are everything. Are the streets any 
uglier or any finer than streets in any seaport town 
in any country ? No, you have seen similar ones a 
hundred times. All that was wanted was just some 
ornament, a sign, a bit of colour to attract your gaze, 
to make them appear picturesque with a character 
of their own, and not commonplace, and then you 
are struck at once. From this time forward you will 
always remember the street of red capsicums in 
which I was born ; it is for ever painted on your 
memory, Rue Saint Charles, at Ajaccio. Now the 
idea of my Legion of Honour is nothing else than 
this, and that is why it is even more stupid than 
it is shameful to bring it into dishonour ; for it has 
often made of a coward a hero and a genius of a fool.' 



 



3  

At the Cafe of the Roi Jerdme, where Prince 
Roland has been recognised by several officers of the 
garrison who had been his comrades at Saint Cyr, 
the conversation has turned to the subject of the 
' vendetta.' 

I have just bought at a jeweller's an interesting 
dagger of the country, which I have been showing 
them. The blade is engraved, and you can read on 
it — 

Vendetta, 1887. 

Are there comet years, I wonder ? And this 
dialogue began : — 

Myself. 

There is something really delicious about this 
vendetta which poets and romance writers have 
celebrated ; in the first place because, unlike most 
things which they celebrate, it really exists, and then 
because it inspires one with that superb contempt 
for reigning institutions which is their due. 

When one thinks that the promulgator of modern 
codes of law — Napoleon, I mean — was born on this 
rock of the Mediterranean, and that its heights are at 
this day crowned by six hundred bandits, one cannot 
help being overcome by that sensation of philosophic 
wonder best described by the expressive word 
' floored.' In fact it is impossible to find anywhere 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 39 

else on the earth a state of opposition between 
Theory and Fact more exhilarating, more consoling, 
or more instructive than is to be found here. The 
one corner of the civilised world where the legislator 
is, as it were, thrown to the dogs is the very corner 
where he first saw the light. This corner remains in 
a state of barbarism. And that, though I blush to 
confess it, is why it interests me. 

Prince Roland Bonaparte. 

The vendetta is explained and justified by its 
origin. That is simply that the Corsicans for 
centuries have found it impossible to obtain justice 
from the hands of their successive conquerors and 
oppressors. And so they just do themselves justice. 

M. Vincent Bonnaud. 
My own private observations have led to a dis- 
covery, the whole glory of which I claim for myself, 
neither Merimee nor M. Paul Bourde having made 
it. It simplifies the whole question. There are in 
Corsica two races of Corsicans — the Corsican with 
smooth hair and the Corsican with curly hair. The 
Corsican with curly hair is a bandit. The Corsican 
with smooth hair is a gendarme. Good Corsicans 
both of them, excellent Corsicans, but if you place a 



 



 

knife between them, one will be at the blade's point 
and the other at the handle end. 

Nature, which works without giving any explan- 
ation of her doings, seems to me to have the whole 
responsibility of this instinctive antagonism between 
people of the same race and almost of the same 
family, for civilisation is simply left staring at it. 
Look into my discovery more deeply, and you will 
not be long in convincing yourself that Corsicans 
with curly hair are obliged to treat with neglect the 
Code of the great Gendarme with smooth hair, and 
to leave all its absurdities to poor continentals, as 
indeed they do leave them to us. 

An Officer {M. de Bonnertve). 

The motives which make men murder one another 
in Corsica are no, different from those in other French 
departments : man is everywhere the same, fierce, 
cowardly, and unsociable. 

If interest pulls the trigger, passion supplies the 
powder. 

In spite of all that an excited imagination can do, 
poets and romancers have not been able to find for 
a Corsican murder a single motive which was not 
known to the Greeks, to our own forefathers, or to 
the Patagonians. Everything that happens in the 
macchia may happen in the park of Neuilly (depart- 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 4 1 

ment of the Seine) and even in the Faubourg Mont- 
martre (Paris), and does happen there. The only 
difference consists in this, that the macckia is redolent 
of rosemary, and the Faubourg Montmartre pestiferous 
with the smell of fried potatoes. 

But the murdered man has so little time to think 
of different odours that the Corsicans are wrong in 
trying to make a distinction out of that. Transport 
the story of a vendetta into the department of Seine- 
et-Marne, and the poet breaks his lyre and seizes his 
revolver. How many times, since I have been here, 
have I not made this naive observation to hospitable 
islanders, who had been telling us stories as startling 
as they were sanguinary ! But they only looked at 
me with astonishment, and as if they thought that I 
in my ignorance really imagined that they were subject 
to the same laws as myself, as you or any other 
member of Christendom. Their flashing eyes seemed 
to say, ' Do you really not know that vengeance is a 
Corsican article, just as honey is a speciality of Nar- 
bonne, and pork-sausages a monopoly of Tours ? ' 

M. Vincent Bonnaud. 
They had curly hair. 

Another Officer (M. Faque). 
Perhaps the error in morality which causes all the 



 



 

misfortune of this marvellous island (which is really 
a terrestrial paradise, laden with all the good things 
one dreams of) proceeds from this very fact that its 
inhabitants hold it to be an exception to the general 
rule. To use an expression of the boulevards, Us 
gobent leur vendetta, they relish it greedily ! Here 
again they are the victims of literature. 

Ever since the appearance of Merimee's Colombo., 
the Corsican walks and speaks and acts altogether as 
if he felt he was being studied by a splenetic English 
major and drawn in water-colours by his daughter. 
He has the pose required for the frontispiece of that 
fatal romance, and carries his rifle as Orso carried it. 

The injuries for which he kills his man and 
then takes to the macchia would be punished by the 
courts quite easily and satisfactorily, and the quarrels 
could be settled by a justice of the peace, for they 
have nothing uncommon or superhuman about them ; 
but the English major is looking at him, and his 
daughter sketching him. Attention, my fine fellow, 
you are employed for the Magajsin Pittoresque ! 

M. Escard. 

The real truth about Corsica was told by M. 

Paul Bourde in the Tem/>s,' and there is nothing to 

be added to his energetic indictment of the custom. 

It is his conclusions only which arc disputed by men 



 



Ajaccio and its Canton 43 

of character whom I have talked to and consulted 
about it. Like Ireland, Corsica sums up all her 
complaints in one cry for 'Justice!' It is evident 
that political motives put false weights in the balances 
which are used here for weighing crime, 

Myself. 
I should like very much to visit the Bellacoscia 
for the sake of clearing up my creed. Is it in the 
programme of the journey ? 

M. Vincent Bonnaud. 
Yes, but we have chosen our time badly ; for at 
this very moment they are being hunted rather 
vigorously, and they have sent to let me know that 
although they had promised themselves the pleasure 
of offering a glass of punch to a French prince, they 
are obliged to ask me to put it off for a few days. 
As soon as they have had time to give the Corsican 
gendarmes a lesson in gendarmerie, they will be at 
our service. What shall we do ? From Bocognano, 
a village close by, you can see distinctly some 
members of this corps dilite scattered on the slopes 
of the Pintica and their national carbines shining in 
the sun. The Bellacoscia are surrounded. But as 
this has been going on for thirty years, I should 
almost like to wait till the gendarmes have come 



 



44 -d. Wild Sheep Chase 

down again looking rather foolish, and then go up to 
the Palais-Vert with my cane in my hand. 

Myself. 

Not to have seen the Bellacoscia is not to have 
seen contemporary Corsica. They are the flower of 
the macchia and the chief feature of the department. 
These two venerable bandits, by their exemplary 
impunity and truly picturesque life, have added 
poetry to the summits of these precipitous Alps, 
clothed with sombre forests, peopled with foxes and 
wild boars, and rising some 6000 feet above the 
level of civilisation. 

At this moment the Prince's huntsman, M. Pascal 
Sinibaldi, came towards us in a state of great emotion, 
and cried in rather a trembling voice, 

' The mouflon ! ' We all started up. 

M. Vincent Bonnaud grew quite pale with joy. 
' At last ! ' he said. ' To arms ! ' 

The mouflon, according to M. Pascal Sinibaldi, 
has been seen at Bocognano on the Monte d'Oro ; 
that is to say, the very place which the Bellacoscia 
inhabit. 

Come ! This is luck indeed ! Let us go ! 



 



CHAPTER II 
BOCOGNANO AND LA PINTICA 

Outlaws. — Albert Glatigny — The gendarme and the lyre — Antonio 
BeUacoscia and Gambetia— La Fintica — Advice of the guidebooks— 
A notable — Corsican women — Departure Tor La Pi Mica— Martha — 
The matchia— The ascent— Cigars and a pipe— The torrent of the 
Gravona — Thorns without roses — The ' quadrata '—The Palais- 
Vert-Gorges and precipices — The domain of BeUacoscia — The 
bandits' bouses— Madalcna — The little girl — Hospitality — Brunette 
and hluniie- The breakfast — Feat of shooting — Philosophy — Natural 
vengeance — Persecution — The ferocious brigadier — Beware ! — 
Antonio's threat — Mercy ! — I defend my hosts — The bandits in 1870 
—An .'leoti on story — A mayor bound — Pardon — A moufion photo- 
graphed. 

If any one supposes that this island of the Bona- 
partes is civilised, he is mistaken. It is, most properly 
speaking, the state of nature. 

Banditism, which, according to Prince Roland, is 
the art of doing oneself justice and that without 
expense, has never been cultivated by a greater 
number of Corsican artists than at this moment. 



 



 

Six hundred of them hold the mountains, and in the 
valleys six thousand accomplices form their pastoral 
army. 

The people are decimating themselves, en famille, 
now among the myrtles and now among the 
rosemary, and the population, which according to 
grave statisticians might attain to a million, is 
reckoned at about 220,000 souls. For statisticians 
count by souls, bodies, as we see, having but a 
secondary value. 

I think in a few years — perhaps when, thanks to 
the admirable custom of the vendetta celebrated by 
Merimee, there are not left more than some 10,000 
islanders, all functionaries — France will consider the 
question of colonising this colony. You need only 
look at the map to see that it is nearer than 
Tonquin. 

Alas ! I shall live to see that time, and I regret 
it, for Corsica, as she is now, enchants me. 

During the few weeks that I passed there I 
realised one of the dreams of my youth : I was 
Leather Stocking among the Red-skins. 

Sylvan metaphors naturally adorned our conver- 
sation, and among ourselves we fellow-travellers knew 
each other only by Fenimoresque nicknames savouring 
of the virgin forest. 

Where is Briar Pipe? 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 47 

In the Liana path with the Mouflon Hunter. 
Partridge Eye is gone to join them ! 

The silent glens, with their wooded undulations, 
made a good background to such dialogues, and 
from time to time a dramatic detonation in the 
mountain gorges, announcing that summary justice 
for something had been done by somebody alone 
under the sky, added to the illusion. It was one 
of the 220,000 souls of Corsica taking flight to 
join the majority- ' Let us pray,' Sword-stick would 
say. 

This resemblance between Corsica and the 
Hudson before its conquest, added to the character 
of the towns through which we passed, contributed 
to make the picture more striking. I could not get 
it out of my mind that Ajaccio was one of the 
English forts, an outpost of armed civilisation from 
which, according to Fenimore Cooper, one was to 
carry off the major's fair-haired daughter! It was 
full of them too, for Great Britain, regretting the 
loss of the island, is gradually making Ajaccio, like 
Madeira, a winter resort, and it will grow into a large 
place. As to Corte, from the first sight of it you 
begin to imagine its frowning citadel assailed by 
Indian scalp-hunters tattooed and howling. They 
are the necessary figures in the picture. 

Bastia realises one's idea of the first factory 



 



 

established by a powerful pioneering company, allied 
with the Red-skins. The fragrance of the pipe of 
peace followed me all about the town. 

The traveller certainly owes to the bandits that 
very keen sensation of a savage state of things which 
accompanies him all over Corsica, and does not leave 
him till he returns to Marseilles. One feels oneself 
at a great distance from a well-policed society, and 
more especially from that Code, whose author, as I 
cannot help repeating, by a strange irony of fate 
was born precisely in that country which makes least 
account of it. The gendarme there looks like an 
anomaly. He is one ; for they do not understand 
what he represents. 

You can easily believe that one of them arrested 
the poet Glatigny one day while he was occupied 
in writing verses to some bouts~rim£s which a black- 
bird had sent him. They must wear out their 
boots somehow, and occupy themselves about some- 
thing. 

You may be sure I did not neglect to visit the 
place, a sacred one to me, which had witnessed 
the sole act of authority accomplished by the 
French government in Corsica. It is true this 
happened under the Empire, and to-day we are a 
Republic. 

I took down my lyre, which I carry wherever I 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 49 

go, strapped to my umbrella, and having taken" the 
road to the gendarmerie at Bocognano I sat down 
before it. The gendarmerie was overflowing with 
gendarmes. 

Those I saw before me seemed to be the sons or 
brothers of those who incarcerated Glatigny. They 
were busy looking through a field-glass at the top of 
a neighbouring mountain which overhangs the village 
and is called La Pintica. 

Now in this Pintica, for more than forty years 
— forty years, mind — two famous bandits, now old 
men, have been living, whom no gendarme has been 
able to -catch under any government. It is true they 
are not poets. When a blackbird speaks to them 
they reply in blackbird language. 

This Pintica is an inaccessible peak to the 
gendarmes. The idea of climbing it would make 
their very boots perspire. They know besides that 
the two old men are crack shots, and that at five 
hundred paces they have never yet missed their 
man. 

' Brigadier,' I said to the man who was using the 
glass, ' you are looking at a very pretty mountain. It 
is as green as an emerald, and I have brought my 
lyre that I may celebrate it in your presence. One 
of my friends, who is dead, has treated the subject 
with great eloquence in a little work dedicated to the 



 



 

Corsican gendarmerie and correctly published by 
Lemerre about 1869. 

' There is the peaceful abode of that ancient 
family of the Bellacoscia which was already flourish- 
ing in the time of the late M. Glatigny and prospers 
exceedingly in ours. Many generations of gendarmes 
have succeeded one another and will continue to 
succeed one another before one of them lays his hand 
on those glories of Corsica, who were visited by 
Edmond About, who had the honour to receive Baron 
Haussmann and after that her Majesty the Queen of 
Sweden, and twenty other strangers of distinction 
on their travels.' 

As the brigadier continued to search the macchia 
of the Pintica with his glass, I drew from my lyre 
some more sounding chords. 

' The eldest of these old men,' I went on, ' the — 
how shall I put it ? — the one who most belongs to the 
comic opera, Antonio, of whom the Guide Joanne 
makes mention, did this : in 1 8 70 he offered 
Gambetta to organise at Ajaccio for the national 
defence a battalion of Corsican bandits 1 He en- 
gaged to bring it fully equipped to Tours, on 
condition that they would guarantee him the 
command. For ten days he walked about in the 
town, provided with a safe-conduct, a very useless 
safe-conduct, O brigadier, and in the Cafe of the Roi 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 5 1 

Je>6me he drank to the prosperity of that land of 
France which he loved so entirely, excepting always 
the laws which govern it. 

1 Perhaps Gambetta was afraid that he would 
demand the Legion of Honour. However that may 
be, when the safe-conduct expired, the aged and vener- 
able Antonio went sauntering back to his mountain. 
From that time he has been sullen in his behaviour 
towards the Republic. He has good reason. At 
the present time it is he who settles the elections of 
the canton, and no candidate would pass within range 
of his Remington who had not first been accepted by 
that exalted influence. Ah, sergeant, you are looking 
at a fine summit ; it is as green as an emerald ! ' 

The gendarme cast a suspicious glance at me and 
twirled his moustache. 

' You seem to know a great many things about 
the people up there,' he grumbled. ' What is that 
instrument you are twanging which gives out sounds 
like the telegraph wires ? ' 

' It is my lyre. I brought it to help me to celebrate 
the Corsican gendarmerie who take poets for bandits, 
and bandits for poets, and fire upon them point blank 
while footing it with their cousins in the whirling 
dance.' 

' Do you think it is easy to go and catch them at 
that height ! ' he said, pointing to the Pintica with a 



 



 

sudden gesture. ' They lurk in inaccessible caverns, 
and in all the forty years that we have been tracking 
them we have never been able to get at them— or 
rather we have never been able to see them. And 
yet this is an excellent glass ! ' he concluded, putting 
his eye to it again. And he went on searching 
desperately into all the caverns. 

La Pintica 

These famous bandits are indeed most extra- 
ordinarily popular in the island, so much so that 
while they are still waiting for the honours of the 
comic opera, to which they have every possible and 
imaginable right, they already enjoy all the glory 
that Joanne and Baedeker can give them. 

' Do not fail,' say these manuals of the perfect 
tourist, ' do not fail when passing near Bocognano 
to go, if you can, and smoke a pipe on the mountain 
(6000 feet) with the brothers Bonelli, famous ethno- 
graphical bandits, who under the name of Bellacoscia 
symbolise the immemorial tradition of the vendetta,' 

Such is the counsel which they give, these 
excellent guides, but it is not easy to follow ; and for 
somewhere about forty years the French gendarmerie 
has been trying without success to go and smoke this 
pipe at that elevation with these Corsican Fra Diavolos. 
That is why, no doubt, Baedeker and Joanne use the 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 53 

expression ' Do not fail — if you can' ! You cannot, 
that is all ; or at least if you can, you hardly can. 

Through a concurrence of favourable circumstances 
it came to pass that I — I, my very own self — have 
smoked this pipe of 6000 feet. It has even been 
granted to me to breakfast in the house of Antonio 
Bellacoscia, in that gorge of the mysterious Pintica 
which the new king of the mountains has christened 
the Palais- Vert. But I left a pair of boots behind, alas ! 

Mercy ! what a climb it was ! 

This visit did not take place until the second time 
we came to Bocognano ; for the first time they could 
not receive us, and sent their excuses to Prince Roland : 
they are of the highest breeding, in all senses of the 
word, as M. Vincent Bonnaud remarked. 

One evening the month after, at the Cafe of the 
Roi Je>6me in the Place du Diamant at Ajaccio, the 
Prince having gone back to Paris, and left us, that 
is M. Escard and myself, to finish our journey accord- 
ing to our own fancies, I was expressing my regret 
at having to leave Corsica without carrying out the 
advice of the guidebooks, ' Do not fail — if you can.' 
At that time it was the more difficult to ' be able,' 
because the unhappy outlaws were being terribly 
harassed by a formidable brigadier of gendarmerie, 
who had sworn to snap them up in spite of the jeers 
of his comrades. 



 



 

To catch the Bellacoscia, fellows who with an old 
flint gun at five hundred yards could knock over their 
man with a bullet through his forehead, and who could 
give lessons to the foxes in the topography of their 
grottoes and caves, is a problem whose insolubility 
in Corsica is equal to that of squaring the circle, 

But it was on account of this ferocious brigadier 
that the Messrs. Bonelli were receiving less than ever 
at the Palais- Vert. ' They have given up their re- 
ceptions for the present,' the officers said as they left 
me. And I was just getting up to return to the hotel 
when a man who seemed to be of note addressed 
me. He was no doubt a person of great honour and 
importance in Ajaccio, for during our colloquy every 
one who passed saluted him with profound respect. 

' I heard what you were saying,' he said with a 
most affable smile. ' You want to see our Bellacoscia. 
At another time nothing would have been easier, 
especially for a lyric poet, as you seem to be. But 
just now they are living in grottoes which are 
inaccessible even to eagles, and which I do not know 
myself. You can therefore only visit their houses, 
their families, their estates. If that will satisfy you, 
at least for this time, you have but to say the word, 
and they shall hear it in a hour/ 

'What, in their inaccessible grottoes?' I in- 
terrupted. 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 55 

' Yes, in their inaccessible grottoes.' 

' By telegraph perhaps ? ' 

' What does that matter to you ? In an hour you 
shall have their answer. But stop a moment— you 
are married, I think ? ' 

' Married ? yes, and the father of a family. But 
what has that ' 

1 1 ought to warn you that manners in Corsica 
are very correct, especially among the bandits. The 
wives and daughters of the Bellacoscia are considered 
beauties here. If you were not a married man 
I should not be sure of their reply. But as you are 
there will be no trouble. Only while you are up 
there talking to these ladies you will have two guns 
pointed at you from a distance of two hundred yards, 
pointed by two arms, directed by four eyes, which 
have never missed the bull's eye, but pointed from 
some grotto near, you will not know which nor where. 
I am only telling you this for your information as a 
traveller, for as you are married of course you have 
nothing to fear. That is clear.' And so saying 
this notable disappeared. An hour after I received 
by a boy a card on which I read — 

M. Z X— — 

Councillor-General of Corsica. 
They will expect you to-morrow to breakfast. 



 



 

I reached Bocognano the same evening at nine 
o'clock, and I could see at once on entering the inn that 
I was expected. Our beds were ready and a meal. 

The next morning, at break of day, we joined our 
escort at a public-house in the village. It was com- 
posed of three persons, chosen with two objects : 
first, to guide us through the labyrinth of the macchia, 
and secondly, to wring our necks if there was any 
need for it, that is to say, if we suddenly discovered 
ourselves as spies after having introduced ourselves 
as tourists. 

There was first a stalwart young fellow of twenty 
with a resolute gait, and features as regular as they 
were strong, a proper nephew for the Bellacoscia ; a 
second youth, his cousin, well built and no less formid- 
able in appearance ; and lastly, a strange enigmatical 
being of no particular age or sex who wore both 
petticoats and trousers, whose name, well known all 
over the island, is Martha. This nondescript person 
was seated at a table in the little public -house, smok- 
ing one of those short thick cigars peculiar to the 
department, which look like a bandaged thumb ; she 
was nursing on her lap a little girl who called her 
' Aunt ' and seemed to adore her. 

This Martha of the bristly chin was to be our 
guide in the ascent of the Pintica. 

'Unless this old woman,' I said to my companion, 



 



and La Pintica 57 

' has a broom to carry her up the mountain, we 
shall certainly not get back from the Palais-Vert to 
supper ! ' 

She heard what I said, smiled, gave her niece a 
kiss between two puffs of sfnoke, and then said, ' Let 
us start.' The two youths buckled on their cartera, 
the belt with their cartridges, slung their guns behind 
them, and we quitted the house through the kitchen 
garden. 

The gendarmes were still asleep, but to lead 
suspicion astray we had sent the mule with the pro- 
visions by the way of the forest of Vizzavona, and 
we ourselves, turning back towards Ajaccio, followed 
the high road, walking innocently along at various 
distances apparently . quite unacquainted with one 
another. All oF a sudden the nondescript person 
who was walking in front, carrying a bundle of wood 
on her shoulders, made a prodigious leap to the right 
and slid down an almost perpendicular slope at the 
bottom of which a torrent was rushing. The young 
Corsicans followed her example, and we were obliged 
to do the same. As for me, I only succeeded in 
reaching the torrent by clinging to some kind chest- 
nut-trees providentially planted there. 

This was the entrance to the macchia. ' To your 
health,' said Martha to me, taking a good pull at 
her flask of rum. And she lighted another cigar. I 



 



 

may as well add here that she had smoked two 
dozen before we reached the Palais-Vert. They 
served as beacons on the peaks to guide us. 

But what a climb it was ! I can understand the 
Corsican Pandours thinking twice about it. 



When we had reached the foaming banks of the 
Gravona, a most sublime torrent without any bridges, 
we were told that we should have to cross it twice, 
and that at spots where it rushes so furiously that it 
carries away blocks of granite ! 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 59 

1 Do as I do ! ' said the hermaphrodite. And 
we followed her with our eyes as she went on bound- 
ing from one rock to another, like a trout in a cloud of 
foam, with her eternal cigar in her mouth. 

The love of truth, which makes the Emperor 
Frederick in the Burgraves acknowledge that he is 
Barbarossa, constrains me to confess that if a plank 
had not been thrown across from one bank to the 
other to enable us to pass this infernal Gravona, I 
should never have breakfasted with the daughters of 
the Bellacoscia, menaced by invisible muskets. 

The torrent having been crossed twice in the 
midst of a bacchanalian uproar worthy of the end of 
the world, my boots began to give way ! 

People who have not been through the macchia 
have no conception of what gymnastics mean ! 
There was no trace of a path through this thick 
quickset hedge. You climb inch by inch over 
pebbles eternally rolling down. Thorns, branches, 
tangled roots prick you, strike you in the face, catch 
hold of you, hit you, wound and tear you. You feel 
yourself being knitted up, and then again carded like 
a skein of thread : you bleed, you swear, you think 
of Regulus and his cask, and your pursuit of pleasure 
ends in despair. From time to time in open spots a 
blow of a friendly fist crushes your hat and knocks 
your scull down out of sight of the gendarmes' telc- 



 



 

scopes ; then you find yourself, O pleasant delirium, 
suspended by the trousers, of at least by what there is 
left of them, over a precipice, with ill-omened birds 
screaming below you in the empty air. 

At every change of scene Martha, who was flying 
along like a sylph without even fastening up her petti- 
coats, gave a short whistle through her fingers and a 
child appeared, sometimes on a tree and sometimes 
from between the rocks. They were sentinels posted 
along our route, announcing our coming. And thus 
we went on for five hours, fevered with climbing, 
dragged along by this smoking sorceress. How the 
Corsicans, even the most robust, bear marches in the 
macchia like this, of which at times in dreams I still 
feel the extreme fatigue and weariness in all my bones, 
is what no one in the Alpine Club could comprehend. 
The Alpine Club, they say, has proposed as a sub- 
ject for competition, ' At the end of how many miles 
in a Corsican macchia would the Wandering Jew be 
obliged to stop, cry for mercy, and expire ? ' I think 
at the end of the first that bearded man would not 
have a hair left in his beard ; it would be hanging like 
gossamer on the briars. At the end of the second 
he would not have a rag left on his body ; at the third 
he would be a mere living, howling icoreki. 

And yet the islanders slip through it like a swallow 
through a spider's web. This is a mystery, but not 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 61 

one of those that Napoleon revealed to Las Cases in 
St. Helena, and the secret is never let out of the 
island. But I have discovered it, and am going to 
betray it for the benefit of our new corps of mountain 
troops. I n certain torrents of the country, and notably 
in the Fium' Alto, which crosses the Orezza, where 
the medicinal waters are, as you know, some little 
ferruginous stones are found of a square form which 
have the magic property of making one untirable. 
The Corsican name for them is ' quadrata.' They 
fasten one to their left knee, a diamond on a gaiter, 
and on they go. 1 

I wanted to buy some for the Societaires of the 
Comedie Francaise, people who are fundamentally 
itinerant ; but they have no virtue unless you find 
them for yourself in the Fium' Alto on a Friday by 
moonlight. 

So from thicket to thicket and from one whistle to 

1 'In the estate of Canari, near a place called Oreglia, a ferruginous 
substance is found which possesses a properly quite unique : whatever 
way you extract it from the earth or rocks it always presents a rectangular 
form like a cube, and because of this the Corsicans call it pictra 
quadrata, and say Quests pietra daft essere quadra come tin dado del 
colore delferro. They tell marvellous tales about it, things so prodigious 
(hat it is not worth while to tell the greater number of the virtues they 
attribute to it ; they say if any one wants to make a long journey he hat 
only to fasten this stone to his left leg, on the inside below the knee, and 
he can walk without gelling tired. A great deal of this ferruginous sub- 
stance is found near Corte.'— Description de I'tle de Corse, by Le Sieur 
Bellin. Paris, F, Didot, 1769. 



 



 

another we went on, until about half-past eleven we 
reached a little narrow plateau, shaded by gigantic 
chestnut-trees, up which, farther than one could see, 
climbed vines laden with purple grapes. 

Here begins the domain of the Bellacoscia, the 
fairy Palais- Vert, the terror of the Pandours. At this 
spot Martha was sitting waiting for us. She was 
gloomy, smoking no more, having no more cigars. 
At a glance I saw what troubled her and handed her 
my pipe, for I know how to behave like a gentleman. 
A charming smile rewarded me, and the amber was 
soon shining between her lips. To smoke like that 
is not smoking ; it is rather like a locomotive rushing 
into a station, as in Turner's picture. A tinkling of 
silver bells sounded in the valley ; it was our mule 
arriving with the breakfast, he also having dodged 
the gendarmes. Two huge mastiffs made their 
appearance at the same moment from the skirts of a 
larchwood, who without barking made straight for 
the strange pairs of trousers, and they had to be 
formally introduced; after which they took their 
places as guides, one before and the other behind. 
We were in the Pintica. 

The Pintica is a gorge or gap in the Monte d'Oro, 
shaped like a funnel, or rather the mouth of a gigantic 
horn, at the bottom of which the Gravona rolls over 
porphyry pebbles. The sides of this funnel seem 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 63 

covered with green velvet, so thick and close grow 
the pine-trees. 

When one has once penetrated into this abyss 
one feels quite safe against any attack, and no one 



but a madman would venture there without a safe- 
conduct. In the vault of the sky, which closes as 
with a sapphire this emerald horn, little eagles were 
sailing, uttering cries which reverberated from the 
rocks, and kept the sonorous waves of air agitated 



 



 

for more than a minute with the echoes. The effect 
was surprising. Two little houses and a fountain 
stood out white upon the green of the hollow like 
three patches of linen on the grass. 

How did the Bellacoscia come to build their 
houses in this Alpine solitude with such an imprac- 
ticable approach, and what masons helped them ? 
Anyhow here they are, these bandits' houses, and 
newly done up too — true Corsican houses, and con- 
structed for defence, with their terraces as outworks. 
They tell me that they are united by a subterranean 
way, and that this passage leads also to the caverns 
where the brothers Bonelli are hid at this moment. 
The young Antonio indicated with a gesture the 
whole circle of the gorge. ' It is somewhere in 
there,' he said, ' but I do not know myself where.' 

' Nor I,' said his cousin. 

' Nor I,' said Martha between two puffs. ' But 
they can see us at this moment. Let us salute 
them ! ' 

We waved our hats in the air, some in one 
direction, some in another. Two reports, which 
came from no one knew where, replied to our courtesy 
and gave us our welcome. Thunder arranged in the 
key of C Major ! The dogs did not bark ; they 
are well trained. 

' Sirs,' said our young guide with dignity, ' in the 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 65 

name of my uncles Giacomo and Antonio, let me 
welcome you as our guests ! ' 

And he pointed out an old woman standing at 
the fountain looking at us. It was Giacomo's wife, 
that same Maria-Madalena who came down with her 
daughters to implore mercy from M. Carnot for one 
of her sons imprisoned in Bastia. But she did not 
move from the fountain. Woman in Corsica is not 
the equal of man, and does not take her part in the 
duties of hospitality. Soon we saw her disappear 
bearing a pitcher on her head, and she was lost to 
sight in the thick bush. 

On the threshold of the house (it was Giacomo's) 
a little girl of scarcely five years old was the first to 
meet us with a smile. The two dogs were planted 
one on each side of. her, and she was caressing them 
in silence. They are the only playthings perhaps 
that the little one has ever had, and they look as if 
they knew it. 

While they were unloading the mule we pene- 
trated into the house. Martha had preceded us, 
and with a frying-pan in her hand was already 
employed in making an omelette. 

' Ah, sir,' she said with a sigh, ' how good your 
pipe was ! ' 

' Thank you ! ' I said, and I pressed her hand. 

Bursts of laughter from two young girls sounded 



 



 

behind me. I turned and I understood then 

why the Councillor-General of Ajaccio wanted to know 
if I was married ! 

These two daughters of Giacomo Bellacoscia, the 
one fair and the other dark, my comrades of the press 
saw at Bocognano, when they were waiting for the 
president of the Republic to pass, and no doubt it 
was their good discretion which prevented them from 
celebrating in verse the admirable beauty of these two 
types of Corsican women. But that M. Carnot could 
have delayed to grant mercy to their brother when 
such eyes and such lips were imploring him — ah no, 
it is impossible ; or if true, France exists no more ! 
When a man is in a sense the successor of Henri IV. 
he has national duties which take rank before 
any other consideration. Sadi, in the name of the 
people you should have signed the pardon at once, 
and gone yourself to the Pintica on the back of a 
mule, to bear it to those old bandits with white 
hair who have done their duty so well in the 
reproduction and perfecting of the human race. 
A hair of one of those two daughters of Maria- 
Madalena is sufficient to atone for all the sins of the 
family. 

Why was I not the Head of the state, when, 
making use of the pretext of the superabundance of 
provisions that we had hoisted up to that giddy 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 67 

altitude, I prayed the two laughing girls to do us 
the honour to share them with us ? Alas 1 decorum 
required their refusal 1 The Corsican woman does 
not sit down to table with her master nor with his 
guests ; she confines her attentions to waiting upon 
them, and in spite of all my supplications this rather 
irksome favour was all I could obtain from them. 
While their young cousins were preparing the table 
in the open air under a trellis laden with bunches of 
grapes, well in sight of the caverns, they made their 
toilettes and dressed themselves in their Sunday 
clothes. And as we had been walking since five 
o'clock in the morning, Martha, bless her ! brought 
out the omelette smoking hot. 

It was a strange breakfast all the same when I 
think of it, and worthy of the pencil of Salvator 
Rosa — on the edge of that precipice, with the eagles 
sailing about over our heads ! 

The Bellacoscia mastiffs learnt to know the delights 
of thy sausage skins, O Lyons, and the little girl the 
pleasures of Ajaccio sweetmeats. Martha had given 
me back my pipe, and the two splendid creatures, the 
blonde fairy and the brunette fairy, filled our cups 
as at the feasts of the gods. And it is these good 
folk, full of the virtues of an Abraham, intelligent, 
proud, handsome, and generous, that the gendarmes 
are harassing and persecuting, for a just though 



 



68 A Wild Skeep Chase 

somewhat lively application of that Lynch law which 
is the glory of America. 

' Alas, sir,' said young Antonio to us, ' what is 
the vendetta? The origin of it is the impossibility 
which the Corsicans have experienced for ages past 
of getting justice from their rulers and their tyrants. 
What a history ours is ! exaction, robbery, murder 
established permanently ! ' 

And he hung his head sadly. 

As for me, I was looking at his cousins, and as I 
looked I seemed to understand his meaning better. 
He perceived my thoughts and began to speak of 
his uncles. He boasted of their extraordinary skill 
in shooting, and gave examples which went beyond 
all probability. 

One of us, a pretty good shot, expressed some 
doubt of one of his stories. 

' That's impossible,' he said ; ' William Tell him- 
self ' 

Antonio did not let him finish, but as our muleteer 
had just put the inevitable bottle of champagne on 
the table, the young Corsican spoke a few words in 
Martha's ear and she immediately went out. We 
saw her going down the slope with great strides. 
Ten minutes after she came back, and I noticed that 
she had laid in a new stock of cigars. Was there 
then a tobacconist's shop at the Pintica ? 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 69 

I had just taken hold of the bottle of champagne, 
and my head a little turned, perhaps, was proposing 
a toast to the father and uncle of our two charming 
cu pbeare rs 

' Hush ! silence ! ' said the nephew, suddenly 
leaning forward to listen. 

' What is the matter ? ' And I put down the bottle. 

'Don't stir! — the gendarmes, I think! Hush, 
don't stir, I say ! ' 

We all sat silent, motionless, listening to the 
distant sounds in the gorge. A shot was heard. 
The cork of the bottle flew off, cut clean away at 
the neck by a ball from a carbine. 

' That's my Uncle Antonio ! ' said the young 
Corsican. ' To the health of the Bellacoscia ! ' 

Philosophy 

Those who know Corsica have no manner of doubt 
that this Napoleonic island is as proud of its bandits 
as the Continent is ashamed of them, 

When a Corsican, even one of the richer classes, 
tells you of one of those deeds- of vendetta which 
have obliged one of his compatriots to take to the 
macchia, it is always with a strange light in his eyes. 
You feel that he is only waiting for you to make 
some foolish objection to declare that he is quite 



 



 

ready to do the same. It is as if fairies drew them 
all to those impenetrable thickets of lentiscus, rose- 
mary, and arbutus, and as if the baleful fragrance 
intoxicated them. 

At Sartene itself I have heard men of the most 
amiable character, and thoroughly French in heart 
and mind, relate the adventures of the ferocious 
Rochini, who was certainly an assassin and a 
monster of crime, and while acknowledging that he 
was unworthy of pity they would find excuses for 
him. And their blame was almost limited to saying 
that he was a disgrace to the bandits. 

And indeed I remember that while they were 
debating the case I felt myself inclining to pity, 
such is the balmy influence of the macchia at 
Sartene ! 

Have I not also bought stilettos at Ajaccio, 
exhibited publicly in the shop windows with the 
word ' vendetta ' engraved on the blade ? and are not 
those which have been used sought for eagerly all 
over the island ? 

To judge people rightly you must judge them at 
home, you must be thoroughly impregnated with 
their habits — I was going to say with the places in 
which they live ; you must be under the same sun 
that beats down upon their heads and turns their 
brains. In every crime, even though done single-



Bocognano and La Pintica 7 1 

handed, there are always two accomplices — nature 
and society. 

It is a muddle-headed notion of Parisians to 
think that it is possible to reduce the Corsican 
bandits by terror, and that the public execution of 
a bandit will stop this unprecedented development 
of the vendetta. The government ought to guide 
the working of justice in this matter, and to attempt 
to terrorise Corsica is not good policy, at least un- 
less you really wish to detach the island from the 
Republic, or the Republic from the island. 

Here is part of a letter that a lady of Ajaccio 
wrote to me in 1888 about the savage attempts at 
repression which were still filling the town with 
terror some months after our departure. 

' For some time we have been subjected here to 
a state of siege ; our prisons are overflowing ; the 
sword of Damocles is suspended over our heads. A 
fiery officer of gendarmes, who has sworn by all the 
gods to extirpate the bandits and to take the Bella- 
coscia, is torturing us all. On the slightest pretext, 
the faintest suspicion, one is summoned to appear, 
interrogated, maltreated, and often sent to prison. 
This new Diocletian walks up and down the isle, 
with his hat cocked over one ear, crying, " Let all who 
conceal or receive the bandits beware ! they shall all 
be taken, not one is to be spared ; poor and rich are 



 



 

all to be treated alike ; the humblest, as well as 
those of the greatest families of Corsica, even those 
who eat their chestnuts off silver plate, shall be 
dragged to prison t "... So every day is signalised 
by some fresh arrests. There are more than thirty 
women in the dungeons, and as many children, 
without counting the men, weeping and breaking 
their hearts. . . . The other day I went to the 
prison with a man who had obtained leave to photo- 
graph them. We were received with threats and 
insults. The men regarded us fiercely in silence ; 
the women in extreme exasperation cried out loudly 
to us to go away, and that we might come back the 
day they were condemned to death and then they 
would all pose for us ! ! Their excitement is 
extreme. The prefect wished to see them, and 
when he appeared to be rather touched at the sight 
of their agitation, Diocletian, who was there on pur- 
pose to keep him firm, said to him, " Do not take it 
to heart so, these are only crimaces ! " ' (sic). (Ajaccio, 
26th August.) 

If you ask for a fine gendarme, here is a fine 
gendarme indeed, and from Alsace too, if one may 
judge by the pronunciation which my correspondent 
ascribes to him. Perhaps it is the very man who 
arrested Glatigny at Bocognano and laid that poet 
{as a poet) on damp straw, 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 73 

But if he is Commandant, he has been promoted 
since 1866 ; he was only quartermaster then. 
Perhaps he owes his advancement to his hatred of 
the romantic so well personified by Glatigny and the 
Bellacoscia, 

But it is not a time for joking when so many 
poor people are suffering in this manner, crushed 
under the boot of a gendarme, and especially when, 
thanks to this boot, a whole French colony is being 
disgusted with French justice. 

Beware, pastors of the people of Voltaire, at the 
bottom a Corsican is an Italian. He is only one 
with us through the glory of Bonaparte, and to him 
even, he prefers Paoli, his own great man, his great 
patriot, who loved Corsica for herself and dreamt of 
giving her to the English that they might civilise 
her. 

I have had a near view of these things. I have 
heard the people's complaints. Take warning in 
time. 

Bonaparte abandoned his countrymen, as he tells 
us himself in his Memoirs, and Napoleon III. 
flattered them ; but any one who has ever seen 
young Corsicans of fifteen years or so mounted on 
half-bred Arab horses, barebacked, without saddle or 
stirrups, grasping the flowing mane and dashing at 
full gallop across the macchia, intoxicated with the 



 



 

open air and liberty, will certainly tell you that this 
is not a race to be tamed by fear, and that the 
gendarme method is bad. 

One of the brothers Bellacoscia, the one most 
highly thought of, old Antonio Bonelli, is said to 
have declared that he will not be taken alive or 
dead. He swears that his gun shall make some of 
the authorities dance, and when he can hold out no 
longer in the caverns where he hides, he and his 
brothers will immolate themselves on a hecatomb of 
gendarmes. This is Antonio's last word. And he 
will keep it, you may be sure, for this old man of 
seventy has a force and energy quite Byronic. 

As the Bellacoscia have in fact never injured 
any one — the Corsicans are very positive about that ; 
as they have cleared and cultivated the almost 
inaccessible macckia on the Monte d'Oro where they 
have been living for the last forty-five years ; as 
they are picturesque and legendary figures, so that 
every guide-book describes them as an ethnographic 
curiosity of the island ; as they do honour to their 
renown by a hospitality worthy of the patriarchs 
of the Bible ; and lastly, as pardoning mercy is a 
civilising force which would have a most powerful 
effect in the land of the vendetta, one naturally asks 
if some deputy will not make an effort to obtain 
from Parliament that this hunting of men shall 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 75 

cease! There is little that is heroic about it at 
any rate. 

But while we are waiting for this deputy to 
cry ' Enough ! ' the Bellacoscias still have their 
visitors. 

I have been one of them. I as well as other 
tourists have crossed the threshold of one of the 
three white houses which form the hamlet of the 
Pintica. I have gathered grapes from their vine. 
I have drunk from the silver spring which gurgles 
in the blue shadows of their chestnut-trees. There 
is a little girl there who hushes to sleep every 
evening a doll that I sent her from Bastia, and asks 
it why so many gendarmes want to hurt her grand- 
father. ' I do not know,' answers the doll ; ' ask 
Caliban who came up here one day to see you, and 
whose laugh you heard echoing in the gorges of the 
green mountain. He is from Paris. He ought to 
know.' 

And during this dialogue a superb creature of 
sixteen, a young untamed Fomarina, with eyes like 
a falcon's, is arranging her black hair on the steps 
of the little crumbling terrace where we sat beside 
her, and perhaps she is thinking that her parents 
were wrong to receive so generously the visits of 
people from the Continent. Their footprints have 
made a path by which the gendarmes are come. 



 



 

I confess that I am possessed by the thought of 
the Pintica ever since I received that letter from 
Corsica. I fancy the wives and children of the old 
hunted bandits in their misery think of me. 

Alas ! it is true that I, the incorrigible joker, did 
make those beetling rocks, where fear ever hovers, 
echo with laughter, that I broke the solitude with my 
gaiety, and brought the joy of a plaything into the 
midst of sleepless anxiety. It is then my duty to 
defend you, my hosts. 

First, then, I repeat, the brothers Bonelli are old 
men ; Antonio has had fifty years of the macchia. 
Why he took to it is inexplicable, especially when 
you consider his intrepidity, almost fabulous even for 
a Corsican. The reason was his horror of the con- 
scription. Fifty years of disgrace digested in the 
hollow of a ravine — is that not a severe punishment 
enough for a defaulter of that kind ? 

One cannot doubt what he had suffered, because 
he made a distinct offer to Gambetta, in 1870,10 
put himself at the service of France at the head of 
500 Bonelli, his brothers, sons, grandsons, nephews, 
grandnephews and cousins, if they would give him 
a safe-conduct. It was given him for a fortnight and 
then withdrawn, no one knows why.- As for his 
brothers, Giacomo and Francesco, they have never 
been charged with anything, but simply followed him 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 77 

to the macchia because he was their brother and 
they loved him. 

But what sort of pleading is this to address to 
gendarmes ! It is not the eloquence that the wild 
Fornarina of the Monte d'Oro would expect from the 
gay Caliban. We must suit our pleading to our 
judges, and our judges are, first of all, republicans, 
Well, then, ye hunters of men, listen. 

I said that the echoes of the Pintica were 
awakened by my laughter. Four hours of clamber- 
ing had not exhausted the stock of good humour 
laid in at Bocognano on the morning of the ascent. 

At the inn of that pretty village Antonio's 
nephew himself had gravely related to us an election 
story, so ridiculously absurd that the very voice of 
the torrents did not sound serious afterwards to my 
ear. This story of which the Bellacoscia were the 
delightful heroes will perhaps do more for their cause 
than their innocence itself. 

There was once upon a time a mayor at Bocognano 
who did not hold the same opinions as the Bellacoscia. 
I do not for the moment know at all what the 
opinion of the Bellacoscia was, but if they were 
Bonapartists the mayor was a republican, and if 
they were republicans the mayor was a Bonapartist. 
Poor mayor 1 what a position ! 

Now it occurred to this unhappy man to desire 



 



 

that the people whom he ruled should all vote at a 
certain election according to his opinion and for the 
candidate of his choice I With this object he took it 
into his head to distribute to those of his electors who 
could not read voting papers clearly numbered, on 
which those who could read would spell out the name 
of this beloved candidate. ' You will pass the urn in 
single file,' he said to them, ' and one after another 
you will put this paper and no other into the hole. 
I have your numbers, and I shall know if any of 
you betray my confidence in you. I say no more. 
Go!' 

There are people who would call that electoral 
pressure. They will certainly not fail to exclaim 
loudly that the mayor was tampering with the 
mechanism of universal suffrage. 

How so ? Can those who do not know how to 
read, know how to write ? The important thing is 
that they should vote, is it not ? 

An urn is an urn. A mayor is a mayor. Or I 
know nothing at all about the matter. 

But the Bellacoscia were not of this opinion. 
People came and told them what was being plotted, 
for they were the preponderating influence in elections 
as in everything else. They issued a summons 
therefore, and at their signal all their kith and kin, 
cousins, nephews, friends, protege^, and shepherds 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 79 

climbed the slopes of the Monte d'Oro and assembled 
at the Palais-Vert at old Antonio's. 

There they held a council at which I should like 
to have been present, for I too am of opinion that the 
five codes are wanting in imagination, and when the 
evening was come they all went back to Bocognano. 
The spinning wheels were all going as usual in the 
chimney corners. 

The next morning the voting began at the 
gendarmerie, the gendarmes being cleared out for the 
purpose. The mayor was at his post, his symbolical 
ribbon on his stomach, smiling-at the urn, which gave 
him back a smile from its lovely mouth ! 

Ten young men of Bocognano, fine fellows from 
twenty to thirty years of age, each with a cyclamen 
in his mouth, present themselves first and march up 
to play their part in the republican game. They are 
silent and calm. 

One of them takes a cord from under his vest, 
and another an enormous cork used for stopping 
casks. The other eight simply display the daggers 
with blades sharpened to a triangular point which are 
the glory of Corsican cutlery. They tie the mayor 
to his seat and gag him there before his urn, leaving 
him installed in all his uncontested authority. Then 
they let in the simple bearers of the numbered voting 
papers. 



 



 

These simple bearers of numbered voting papers no 
sooner see the congested countenance of the mayor and 
note his resemblance to the howling Laocoon of the 
celebrated Virgil than they understand at once that the 
breath of liberty is blowing from a neighbouring hill. 

Without any hesitation they exchange their little 
papers for other little papers which are given to them 
of the same size, perfectly similar, and which bear an 
equivalent but rival name, and under the very eye of 
the angry mayor they carry out their civic duties, 
and the urn swallows all. 

It is unnecessary to add which candidate carried 
the day that year in the Bellacoscia canton, and I 
hope that is a matter of as great indifference to you 
as to me, the story in itself being such a good one. 

Whenever I feel sad I think of that mayor, and 
delight in picturing the pleasure he must have felt in 
the evening when he was untied and had something 
to drink. They told me he resigned a short time 
after and retired into private life. His career was 
ended. Well, he only missed the banquet in the 
Champ de Mars at the Universal Exhibition of '89, that 
was all — and that indeed was not much, was it ? 

And now, give ear, O gendarmes ! That mayor 
was an awful Bonapartist ! The Bellacoscia on the 
contrary, as I must tell the whole story, were working 
for our holy Republic. And yet you go on hunting 



 



Bocognano and La Pintica 81 

them ! Listen, little girl with the startled eyes, 
chattering to your doll from Bastia about what is 
called human justice ; tell your grandfather, as a 
message from Caliban, that he has only to take a 
pen and some paper (he has some, I know, I saw it 
in his house) and write to M. Carnot a letter like 
this : — 

To the President of the Republic. 

Sir — I have been for nearly fifty years the curiosity and the 
poetry of a colourless age with sombre manners, and in me you 
have one of the last of the old-world cony-catchers. A kind of 
stage outlaw, I am colonising a French island, which has been 
more neglected a hundred times than that in which the negroes 
died of hunger clasping the tricolour to their breasts. Innocent 
of any real crime, I have never killed any one except in legiti- 
mate self-defence and to escape being killed myself, as all 
evidence will show, and my only fault is having gagged a comic 
tyrant of a mayor who wanted to cheat at the game of the 
ballot-box. 

Shall I add that I am an old man, and that at over seventy 
one acquires all kinds of prescriptive rights ? Yet my house 
and my brothers' houses are surrounded by a French army, and 
from the cave in which 1 am hiding I could bring down like 
a young partridge a certain officer whom I keep covered with 
my gun as he dangles after one of my girls, the fair one. Now 
in exchange for the pardon which I desire, that I may end a 
Byronic life in peace, I make a definite offer to the Republic 
of the canton of Bocognano and its votes. Take it or leave it. 

They are all to be had for Emmanuel Ar&ne, an amiable 
lad, as Opportunist as you can wish ; or all for — Boulanger, 
who is worrying you to death ! It is for you to decide whether 
my life is worth a canton of Corsica. The envoy to whom I 
entrust my message is my grateful guest, the laughing 
philosopher. 



 



82 A Wild S keep Chase 

Now for quite another subject ! 

While directing his glass towards the Monte 
d'Oro, of which Prince Roland, who is a fanatical 
mountaineer, was making the ascent, M. Philippon, our 
photographer, saw a mouflon pass ! Better still, the 
mouflon is fixed on the plate ! We have his portrait ! 
M. Vincent Bonnaud is triumphant. He pretends to 
recognise it. ' It is a son of my poor Nemorino of 
Sartene,' he says. ' He has inherited his grace and 
his sweet little beard.' Now the mouflon went off in 
the direction of the forest of Vizzavona. I need not 
add that we are following him, behind the diligence ! 



 



AN ETHNOGRAPHICAL NOTE 



THE LEGEND OF THE BELLACOSCIA 

In spite of the philosophy which is natural to me, and which 
leads me to conclude that for three quarters of the sum of 
human error the best remedy is mercy, I do not wish to be 
accused of social cowardice in this matter of the little kings of 
the Corsican mountains, whose story captivated perhaps a 
little more than was reasonable the incorrigible artist side of 

What M. Paul Bourde relates of the Bellacoscia family and 
of its two present chiefs, Giacomo and Antonio (v. En Corse, pp. 
2.38-260), rather takes the curl, I allow, out of my little 
flourishes on the subject, and my strange hosts of the Pintica 
are despoiled in that book, not of their mediaeval poetry — far 
from that — but of that veil of ethnographic excuse which 1 
cast over their uncivilised state. It is clear that if they have 
committed all the crimes with which my confrere charges them, 
and that on good information collected from impartial witnesses, 
these bandit figures do better in a forest than anywhere else, 
and the interest they offer to a tourist is chiefly decorative. 

But if I have been a little too lyrical, has not he been a 
little too legal P 

I have heard the story of the Bellacoscia told in twenty 
different ways in Corsica. Energetic assertions on one side, 
and fierce denials on the other, have left me in a state of 
perplexity as to the number, if not the character, of the mis- 



 



 

deeds attributed to them. The thing most often asserted 
seemed to be a confusing Mormonism of the earliest Biblical 
type which makes their genealogies obscure. 

But is M. Paul Bourde sure of all the rest \ The stories 
which he accepts, and according to which old Antonio, the son 
of a father who married three sisters, was rejected by the mayor 
when he presented himself to have his marriage legally solem- 
nised because he had no legal existence, and thereupon killed 
the mayor, carried off the girl and took to the tnacchia, — these 
stories altogether make a fine tale belonging rather to the days 
of romance than to a stupid, characterless age. Love is love, 
and what is to be done if poets celebrate on the one hand 
what the judges condemn on the other. I am exhausting 
myself in arguing this question with the Code. 

Walter Scott, who wrote Rob Roy, would have nothing but 
garlands for Antonio Bonelli, and he would have given us the 
murder of the obstinate mayor in one of those masterly scenes 
which raise the practice of extenuation to the rank of a fine 
art. Besides, the poor mayor was a notary. M. Paul Bourde 
confesses it, and all picturesque Corsica acknowledges it. A 
notary ! ! ! 

The young girl, indeed, whom Antonio loved, did not love 
him. She loved another to whom her father wished to give 
her. Papa's name was Casati. 

Papa Casati had made up his mind to marry his cherished 
Giovanna to a handsome lad whom she loved, and who bore 
the charming name of Marc' Angeli. That was his idea. 
The Bellacoscia, who were three, did not think twice about it. 
They carried off the father-in-law. What came of that ? 
What is written, as wise men say. 

The young Marc 1 Angeli set his romance in opposition to 
Antonio's romance, armed some friends of his, and together 
they climbed the Pintica. It was imprudent, as the event 
proved. Captured by his rival he was forced to renounce 
Giovanna before he could recover his liberty, and the father 
Casati on his side for the same consideration took an oath to 
give up for ever the son-in-law he had chosen. 

But those who want strength may try cunning. The hand- 
some Marc 1 Angeli, once down again in the plain, hurried with 



 



An Ethnographical Note 85 

the consenting Giovanna to the successor of the slain mayor, 
the notary, and he united them in the name of our miserable 
laws. 

A month after Marc' Angeli lay dead. 

He lay dead, pierced by a ball from Antonio's unerring 
gun ; in strict accordance with Darwinian law, M. Paul Bourde. 
The next morning Antonio in a pair of new gloves came once 
more to the appalled Casati to ask for the widow's hand. 
The old man flung it him and fled the island. 

It is a story of two stags fighting to Nature's heart's content, 
and to me the only criminals are those who failed to keep 
their oaths. 

M. Paul Bourde tells a great many other stories which he 
heard, I like to suppose, from the Bellacoscia's enemies. It is 
Giacomo especially against whom he brings his charges, and 
whom he accuses roundly of — making a practical use of his 
skill with the carbine. Vou will understand my euphemism. 
Antonio has remained poor. Giacomo should be rich, and 
enlarges his borders every day at the cost of the cowardly 
landowners who are intimidated or threatened by this high and 
mighty lord. It is Giacomo who puts upon his cards ' Giacomo 
Bonelli, the independent ! ' 

Independent he is, for he pays no taxes. They are light, 
however, in Corsica. 

I ought to say that Antonio seemed to me much more 
esteemed in the island than even his brother. His legend is 
of a more gentle type, and only consists of love stories. He 
passes for a good fellow at Ajaccio, and the French officers 
who are so ridiculously employed in hunting him (that is the 
word) talk much of his courage and his disinterestedness. 
Antonio is loved ; Giacomo is feared. The two sentiments 
they inspire combine to produce the enormous influence of 
their name, an influence which, as I have said, extends to 
elections. The Bellacoscia are the great electors of the 
department. 

Since 1 887, however, they have been much harassed in the 
Pintica, and at the very moment that I am writing this note 
(October 1890) there has been let loose upon them a lieu- 
tenant of gendarmerie, a countryman of theirs, who is a rival 



 



 



as well as an enemy, for he won the Grand Prize and was 
crowned victor at the Tir National ! 

Poor Antonio must not close an eye. If one of the rivals 
can hit the leaf which trembles under a bird, the other can 
bring down the bird as it flies away. The one who first shows 
his nose to the other will have no noseJ What a strange 
country, and what an astounding idea of justice ! 

But if M. Paul Bourde's indictment is well founded, and if 
these legendary bandits are guilty of serious crimes — rape, 
theft, outrage, and murder— I have nothing to say in their 
defence, and the shot which won the prize at the National Tir 
may fairly be followed by another. The Bellacoscia have a 
collection of magnificent guns of all kinds and for all ranges, 
presents from their enthusiastic English admirers and from the 
great folk who visit them. Let them defend their lives. That 
too is Biblical ! 



 



CHAPTER III 
CORTE AND ITS ENVIRONS 

After the mouflon — Foce di Vinavona— The (orcsi— Since burnt — The 
cyclamen inn — The old blind woman — The odour of the woods — The 
Corsican weed— Flight from the Monte Rotondo— Vivario, the Cats— 
A statue of Diana — Bells in the trees — Pope Formosus — Jean Paul 
Laurens — Coffee lime — Serraggio di Venaco — 1'ozzo di Borgo — 
Monster chestnut trees— Cone — Description — Situation — The two 
torrents — Pasquale Paoli — The true great Corsican of the Corsicans— 
Fountains — The jMung racers — The return of the ashes — Hotel de 
1'Enrope — Peveronata, the Corsican bouillabaisse — Broccio — The 
Corsican Verdier — The cutler — My walking-stick ! — The Corte Club — 
Paoli's fool — Minuto Grosso — Palazzo di Corte — The prisoner — The 
prison — The leathern pipe — The college — The museum — Paoli's 
throne — Mouflon talk. 

Ah, friend Vincent Bonnaud, what a dance your 
mouflon is leading us ! But we are not pressed for 
time. And along this blazing road which glitters in 
the September sun like a ribbon of shot silk, our good 



 



 

chariot bears us to the tinkling sound of bells, 
rocking us into the calm philosophy of hunters who 
enjoy chatting about sport, but are free from its 
vanity. 

Whether the mouflon be or be not, what does 
it matter so long as we have the chasing of 
him ? 

Who is not chasing some wild sheep in this 
world, and who is there that catches him ? 

A political wild sheep or an amatory, a social, a 
religious wild sheep, an artistic, a scientific, a financial 
or industrial wild sheep, what do I know or any one 
else ? But it is a wild sheep with horns, and a sheep 
running away and which one never interviews except 
in dreams. However, I am beginning to have my 
doubts about yours, the Corsican mouflon. I watch 
you out of the corner of my eye, when you start off 
on the subject as you did at the Cafe de la Paix. 
Your Nemorino of Sartene seems to me to be related 
to the zoological family of the cony which some 
people catch. Are you really serious, my dear 
Vincent Bonnaudr That glittering two-barrelled 
gun which you carry slung over your shoulder, is 
it a gun that will go off and hit ? Can it be only 
ornamental, as indeed all the guns in the island 
are? 

Serious ! ah no, pray do not be that ! May 



 



Corte and its Environs 89 

you ever be preserved from that, and let the mouflon 
live ! I for my part will grant him grace. 

But here we are in the forest of Vizzavona. Is 
it there the mouflon is doomed to die ? 

We arrived at the Foce di Vizzavona full of joy 
and hope, the weather magnificent, our souls more 
eager for the chase than Diana's, and so famished 
that we should have devoured the mouflon alive, 
horns and all, if that imaginary beast had lent him- 
self to the experiment. 

You, my dear friend, had been drinking of all 
the torrents on the road, pretending to be able to 
distinguish the various flavours and recognise the 
peculiar taste of each. So a man passes himself 
off for a Spaniard I I for my part had been regaling 
myself on the strawberries of the arbutus, for which 
1 have a passion, and the Prince, always ahead, was 
climbing the steep with such huge strides that at the 
end of every mile or so he was obliged to come back 
to us that we might not feel too humiliated, and so 
he did the road twice over. 

When the shades began to fall and forms became 
indistinct our photographer, deceived by strange 
resemblances, kept stopping every minute to consider 
objects with a mouflonesque outline and fixing his 
glass eye on the depths of the macchia. 

At last we arrived at the plateau, the highest 



 



 

point in Corsica attainable by carriages, now lying 
covered with heaps of ashes, 1 but then in its green 
luxuriance. 

The plateau of Vizzavona is about two square 
miles, and rises to a height of about 4000 feet 
above the level of the sea. It is the centre of the 
island. 

In the winter, the road that traverses it is very 
frequently blocked by snow, and communication 
interrupted between Ajaccio and Corte. 

Travellers stop at a little waggoner's inn, kept 
by two charming sisters whose kindness is proverbial. 
An old blind mother sitting motionless by the hearth, 
about whom young girls are moving, thoughtful and 
silent, lends mystery to the interior of this Corsican 
osier ia. 



1 Alas ! this superb forest has just (August 1890) been burnt up and 
consumed like a faggot of dry pine wood. If the news from the island is 
to be believed, it is nothing but a heap of ashes. There is apparently 
not a lariccio pine or a terebinth left Poor forest, it has no tuck ! It 
has been burnt three limes in a quarter of a century ; first in 1863 and 
again in 1882. When we went through it in 1887 in our pursuit of the 
mouflon chimera it still bore the traces of its last disaster. Are forests 
like men, divided into two groups— those who have luck and those who 
have notP You know t incline to a fatalist philosophy. But how and 
by whose means forests burn in this diabolical country will he who 
knows tell, and who will know if he does tell ? Anyhow, in the 
pastures of Monte d'Oro the shepherds must have had a magnificent 
sight, and the eternal snows must have been rosy red if the forest 
keepers of the Foce were green. But the mouflon ? It is the mouflon 
of which I am always thinking. 



 



Corte and its Environs 91 

She is like a statue of the Vendetta represented in 
the form of an old woman of tragic mien, dimly seen 
in the shadows of the chimney corner, pale, expres- 
sionless ; and as the Foce di Vizzavona is famous in 
the popular voceri of Corsica for the exploits per- 
formed there by bandits of renown, the first sensation 
as you cross the threshold is thrilling. 

However, heaven knows how kindly the good 
people received us ! Our coming had been signalled 
to them, and we found the little inn entirely covered, 
and as it were embroidered, with cyclamens, like an 
altar of the Fete Dieu, so flowery that we dared not 
pass the door. The girls had gathered this enormous 
quantity of cyclamen that morning in the forest, and 
the whole hamlet had been requisitioned to decorate 
the little house. 

A poetess welcomed us in complimentary verses, 
and the repast was served us by the light of all the 
candlesticks that could be collected from the poor 
foresters. 

Corsican hospitality invariably furnishes a meal 
of three dishes, all excellent : squares of raw pork 
salted and smoked, trout from the stream, and goat's 
milk cheese. In the shooting season they add a 
course of red partridges. Everything is given you 
cold ; and I must say that for the partridges, and still 
more for the trout, this method of preparing them is 



 



92 A Wild Sheep C/iase 

better than any other. Corsican river trout eaten 
cold has an extraordinary flavour far above that of 
Swiss lake trout. For a gourmet it is worth the 
trouble of the crossing and even a slight shipwreck 
into the bargain. 

Ah, my dear friend, do you remember that charm- 
ing picturesque supper under the black dome of the 
Vizzavona larches ! An evening not to be forgotten ! 
Cyclamen dropping from the garlands rained upon 
our plates and were gathered up in handfuls by the 
grandchildren of the sightless old woman. 

Far away the sound of waterfalls rent the silence 
of the mountain ; and the report of rifles fired at the 
stars by our hosts' friends and relatives, and repeated 
by the echoes a hundred times, awoke the wild boars 
in their lairs and the foxes in their holes. 

How we drank to all that were dear to us in that 
Corsican wine, golden as sherry, strong as alicante, 
such as Horace would have loved ! 

What songs were sung till midnight, what stories 
told, wild tales of bandits implacable but gentle, 
whose primitive loves and heroic freedom the vile 
gendarmes would restrain, and who have solved the 
problem of taking without stealing and killing with- 
out assassination ! 

The white peak of Monte d'Oro, which Prince 
Roland was going to ascend at dawn, glittered through 



 



Corte and its Environs 93 

the foliage like a gigantic diamond, and we could see 
as distinctly as in the daytime the girdle of pines and 
the little Genoese fort like a buckle at the side. 

' The mouflon is there,' you said to me with the 
assurance of a Nimrod ; ' if he is anywhere he is there.' 
And wrapping yourself in your blanket to sleep, you 
bade me meet you the next day at that hyperbolical 
fort, a ruinous monument of Italian tyranny. 

At that time you could still impose on my credu- 
lity ; I still believed in the mouflon, which, alas ! is 
but an Apocalyptic beast. I had such faith still that 
I left the inn surreptitiously while it was yet night, 
and with my gun on my shoulder went through the 
wood towards the little Genoese bastion that I might 
see him (the mouflon), and even kill him, before you. 

Never shall I forget the smell of that Vizzavona 
forest in the night time. Not a breath of wind agitated 
the thick pines and larches. Above my head in the 
luminous space between the trees, as I went down 
the alleys of this wild park, invisible archers launched 
shooting stars which fell far away into the sea, 
forming immense curves as they passed over the 
peaks. Among the bushes a whispering sound went 
on, conveying ideas of flight, of sudden wakings and 
rapid retreats, and from the soil, draped in brambles 
and broomrape, rose up a resinous exhalation mixed 
with the aroma of Indian ink, which seemed to go to my 



 



 

head and make me dizzy. It was the turpentine ooz- 
ing from the trunks and richly perfuming the ground 

I was obliged to run out into the road to escape 
intoxication. But even there the strong odour pur- 
sued me, and I lighted a pipe of the Corsican herb to 
overcome it. 

The Corsican herb is a kind of coarse tobacco, 
peculiar to the island, excessively strong, which the 
shepherds smoke in the open air in long pipes of 
cherry wood. I had a handful of it in my pocket. 

But the remedy was worse than the disease, and 
another kind of giddiness began to seize me. So 
by the light of the stars I took my way to a 
little pool, whose silver surface was shining among the 
jujube-trees, the wild palms and thorn-trees, and having 
bathed my temples and nostrils with the icy water 
I passed the last hours of the night there. 

The dawn soon appeared, putting out the stars, 
and then the break of day colouring the undergrowth 
with a rosy red. The cyclamen began to open, 
the little pond took on the colours of the tulip's 
heart, and on the first slopes of the Monte d'Oro I 
saw our friend Prince Roland Bonaparte beginning 
his ascent between his two guides through the trans- 
parent mists of the macchia. 

Little inn of the Foce, garlanded with cyclamen, 
George Sand's favourite flower, may I one day 



 



Corte and its Environs 95 

have the pleasure of seeing thee again ! Heaven 
watch over the good folk who received us there so 
warmly, and may the railway, which is about to be 
opened, they say, make rich the charming women 
and pretty children of that Corsican family ! 

The time to leave has come — alas, it always comes ! 
The waterfalls call us to the winding road, and the 
old stream of the Vecchio, which sent us of his trout, is 
waiting for our after-dinner call. En voiiure, mouflon 
hunters 1 

But in very truth parting time finds us silent, 
almost sad ! We all feel that we have left behind at 
that little forest house one of the happiest days of 
our journey, of our life perhaps, and that something 
has vanished into the past which no sun will ever 
restore. 

The Prince especially is melancholy. His ascent 
of the Monte d'Oro (7845 feet) has awakened his taste 
for climbing. His Alpine mania is excited by his 
contact with the silvery snow of the peak, and he 
would like to be climbing again, ever climbing ! 
What a geographic soul ! Besides, he has seen all 
Corsica from the summit, and he gives us a magni- 
ficent description of it. Happy the man who climbs, 
following Lamartine's precept, ' Va sur les hauteurs' 
But had he seen the mouflon ? 

No ! he had not seen it. 



 



 

The mouflon must be on Monte Rotondo, which 
we are going to pass. Now we do not stop at Monte 
Rotondo, although it is 8776 feet in height, that is 
931 feet more than the Monte d'Oro. We cut the 
peak, though for a long time it passed for the 
highest in Corsica ; it has had to give in to Monte 
Cinto (8890 feet), which outdoes it by 114 feet. 
Thus old reputations crumble away ! 

I think our friend is a little put out with Rotondo. 
When one has been for a long time the chief sugar- 
loaf of a country, one should not let oneself be cut out 
by a new-comer, confound him! We left the Rotondo 
on the left hand, with its virgin forest where no 
woodman's axe has ever been heard, and passed on 
to Vivario. 

The Prince would not even look at the landscape. 
He took out of his bag a little pocket chessboard, 
and challenged me to the art of Rosenthal. - In two 
moves I was in trouble. ' It is shepherd's gambit ! ' 
he said; 'the proper thing in these mountains.' It 
was useless to insist. I am not good enough at 
chess to mask the Rotondo which is passing. 

It is passing. It is passed ! 

We are descending to Vivario at full speed with 
a motion like an infernal waltz. Everything seems 
to be turning round, and thanks to the giddiness 
produced by it the memory of our charming 



 



Corte and its Environs 97 

hostesses is being dissipated and the wind is blowing 
it away. 

On the road we meet some honest waggoners 
going to Bastia with some sacks of maize, and we 
charge them if they meet the mouflon to tell him to 
wait for us. 

I do not in the least know why the pretty little 
town of Vivario is called the Cats of Vivario, " Gatti 
di Vivario." Not only did I not see more cats 
there than elsewhere, but I did not see any at all, 
neither on the tiles nor by the spinning wheels. 
The explanations we gave each other of the peculiar 
name were of the nature of facetias, and though they 
made us laugh like monks, could add little to the 
ethnographical knowledge of the caravan. 

The best was what our friend the mouflon hunter 
gave us. ' They add the word " cats," ' he said, ' to the 
name Vivario because people visit it chiefly in Mi- 
aout ' (the middle of August) ! 

You can guess from that piece of wit in what 
state of mind we enter the village, where the first 
thing which meets our astonished gaze is a statue of 
the huntress Diana. 

Why Diana ? Is it an allusion to the object of 
our journey ? If so, it is a very cruel one, for we never 
saw fewer mouflons anywhere than in the square and 
near the fountain where that ironical statue is erected. 



 



 

Vivario, with or without its cats, is a town of 
i 200 or i 500 souls, chiefly remarkable for the fact 
that the vendetta has been abolished here. 

A Latin inscription on the portal of the little 
church testifies to this fact — ' Maledictus qui 
percusserit clam proximum suum, et dicet omnis 
populus : Amen!' 'Cursed is he that smiteth his 
neighbour secretly, and let all the people say Amen ! ' 

Most excellent '. But I do not know why, I should 
not more than half trust to it. The imprecation 
for one thing has something Jesuitical about it. It 
says ' clam,' that is, secretly. Now there are open, 
audacious vendettas, as every one knows. 

Is it to the disappearance of the vendetta at 
Vivario that the want of bells in the tittle church is 
to be attributed ! For it has none, and its belfry is 
without a brazen tongue. They had no doubt kept 
all the bronze they had for the Diana, that is the 
first idea that strikes me, and my old mania for the 
beautiful Greek worship is flattered. Ah, to find 
in the depths of a Cyrnian valley the traces of 
that marvellous mythology, the human religion par 
excellence, the most joyous of religions, that would be 
indeed a philosophical discovery ! 

I begin to think what the imagination of a Le- 
conte de Lisle would have done with the subject, and 
what a poem he would have given us. The cats of 



 



Corte and its Environs 99 

Vivario melting down the bells of their church to 
cast a statue to Diana hunting with her dogs I 

But my dream is soon dissolved. The Vivarians 
have bells ; only they are hung on the trees, and 
nothing can be more picturesque. 

When the bellringer comes to ring them for the 
services the vibration that is communicated to the 
chestnut-trees knocks down the chestnuts and the 
clusters of purple grapes with which the branches 
are festooned. 

There is a historical interest too attaching to the 
town which recommends it to those tourists who 
travel for the sake of instruction. It was at Vivario, 
they say, about the year 816, that that bluff old 
pope Formosus was born, one of the most pugnacious 
wearers of the tiara that Christianity can boast of. 
So that Corsica has had her own holy Father ! This 
Formosus, whose history is a little obscure, has been 
brought to light these last few years by a famous 
picture of Jean Paul Laurens ! 

You know, or perhaps you do not know, that Pope 
Formosus was disinterred after his death by the 
orders of his successor on the throne of S. Peter, 
Stephen VI. 

I do not remember exactly what he had done or 
what crime he had committed against the Church. 
Whatever it was, his body, disinterred and attired in 



 



ioo A Wild S keep Chase 

pontifical robes, and seated in state under the dais, 
was subjected to trial before a council. 

They questioned him ; counsel answered for him, 
I suppose, and he must have answered very badly, for 
the ex-pope was unanimously condemned. 

He was mutilated, decapitated, and thrown into 
the Tiber. Some fishermen fished him up and 
buried him secretly in the basilica of S. Peter's, 
where he still remains. Jean Paul Laurens made 
an admirable use of this picturesque scene in ecclesi- 
astical history, and I could easily recall to mind at 
Vivario the very simple arrangement of this post- 
humous trial scene, and the ferocious gesture with 
which Stephen accuses this victim of a vendetta 
pursued beyond the grave. 

Corte is only seven miles and a half from Vivario ; 
but as we intended to breakfast in the capital of 
Corsican independence, and had in fact telegraphed 
to order our breakfast at the Hotel Pierraggi, we 
were obliged to leave the cats' town early. 

From the winding road by which we climbed to 
the bridge over the Vecchio, the roofs of Vivario, 
lighted up by the rising sun, seemed to flame like 
the glass of a green house. 

All of a sudden everything grew dark, and the 
valley sank, so to speak, in a cloud, without our 
being able to understand why, nor how it came to 



 



Carle and its Environs 101 

pass that the cloud was fragrant. But as it spread 
around us a delicious perfume of hot rolls and coffee, 
the phenomenon was explained. Each chimney was 
smoking and adding its thread to the floating veil 
bordered with light, which was soon dispersed by the 
breeze. 

Serraggio di Venaco is an important place, pro- 
mising to yield a harvest to heaven of two thousand 
Corsican souls. 

When we went through it, it was a prey to masons 
and architects, who seemed to be going to build some 
more country houses there, fine wealthy - looking 
houses too, built of gray marble, giving evidence that 
their owners were men of fortune. Serraggio is on 
the road to become a very aristocratic summer resort, 
and I have seen elegant Amazons there that the Bois 
de Boulogne would not have disowned. Perhaps it 
might have recognised them indeed. 

Serraggio was the original seat of the illustrious 
family of the Pozzo di Borgo, traditional and heredi- 
tary enemies of the Bonapartcs. 

Here you visit the castle, which is still inhabited 
by the descendants of Count Carlo Andrea, the famous 
diplomatist. It is, they say, a magnificent and hos- 
pitable house, whose doors are always thrown open 
to the French tourist. 

We shall not knock at the door, to my great 



 



 

regret, for I should have been proud and pleased, I 
confess, to be present at a very French scene of 
reconciliation between the great nephews of such a 
pair of uncles. It would have made a noise in the 

world. ' Maledictus qui percusserit ' * 

Whether the reader finds it amusing or not to 

.' In a queer Utile book entitled Notes on Ihc Island of Corsica in 
1868, dedicated 'to those who aie in search of health and enjoyment,' 
whose author is a Scotch lady, named Thomasina M. A. E. Campbell 
( Ajaccio 1872), I read the following prophetic paragraph : ' A very long 
winding and steep ascent brings you to the village of Serraggio, where 
I saw the finest specimen of a mouflon or wild sheep of the country 
that has ever been captured.' [They sent it afterwards to Bastia.J 
' Eight years old, in height much above a common sheep, more like 
a deer in every respect excepting its horns, which are of immense thick- 
ness and bend forward ; the colour of the hair (not wool} is a mixture 
of brown, black, and white, with a large circular spot of white surrounded 
with black on each side and a broad line running beneath it ; a thick, 
frizzled sort of long black mane beneath the throat to below the chest, 
and the finest and quickest eyes imaginable.' So then this lady 
traveller confirms the existence of the mouflon. She saw it in 1868 ! 
It inhabited Serraggio. Is it possible that our friend Vincent, whose 
double-barrelled carbine began to look a little deceptive, is really a 
more serious zoologist than he seems ? Miss Thomasina M. A. E. 
Campbell adds gravely : ' This magnificent animal was hunted down the 
mountains three months ago by dogs, and when completely exhausted 
was captured by some labourers at work in a field in the valley. He 
seemed very fond of the woman to whom he belongs, licking her hand 
and following her, and she has hitherto refused to sell him even for two 
hundred francs.' 

If the mouflon was really taken to Baslia, we will go to fiastia and 
seek out the traces of it. It is our duty 1 If it was eight years old in 
1868, indeed, it will be twenty-seven now, and therefore the Methuselah 
of mouflons. Is it possible they are kept so long upon the earth? It 
is not probable. But perhaps lie married like Nemorino of Sartene 
and lie may have become a father. M. Bonnaud smites at the suggest- 
ion. What a strange enigmatical man ! 



 



Corte and its Environs 103 

follow me along the philosophical zigzags of this 
rapid excursion across the Mediterranean islet, he 
will at least do me the justice to confess that my 
title does not deceive him. I do not announce on 
my cover anything scientific, political, or social. The 
mouflon I am pursuing is a simple artist's ideal, 
nothing more, and my object is to amuse without 
instructing. 

Technical books published by learned men on 
Corsica, by historians, ethnographers, botanists, 
engineers, geologists, amount to between three and 
four thousand, and form a complete library supplying 
every information that can be desired. Ten years 
of a laborious life well employed would hardly suffice 
to make a resume" of them, and the book thus con- 
structed would indeed be a literary monument. If 
I had been a Corsican I would have begun the 
enterprise at twenty. The number of curious facts, 
astonishing adventures, original characters, the abund- 
ance of stories, romances, and dramatic events, with 
the magnificence of the scenery in which they are 
framed, all this and more would furnish a great 
writer with a quite unparalleled opportunity for 
exercising his finest faculties in art, philosophy, and 
eloquence, and winning the laurel. 1 Yet I think one 

1 Napoleon has given us the history of M. Pozxo, his compatriot, 
who had been a member of the Legislature. He it was, it is thought, 



 



1  

of the most stirring chapters in the book I have been 
imagining would be a study of that diabolical and 
merciless struggle, knowing neither truce nor quarter, 
which Count Pozzo di Eorgo carried on against his 
Paolist fellow-countryman and companion-in-arms, 
the triumphant Napoleon Bonaparte ; for these two 
Corsicans would neither of them yield a foot, 

Pozzo's implacability was appalling. His tenacity 
of purpose equals that of Ulysses, whom he resembles, 
and whose wandering life he lived over again, a 
genuine Odyssey of hatred, which has not yet found 
a Homer. When the eagle dropped at St. Helena, 
flapped his wings and died, Pozzo di Borgo, who had 
flung him there, uttered a cry of joy which could be 
heard through the storm. 

' It was not I who killed little Bonaparte, but I 
bury him ! God be thanked ! ' 

And he survived him twenty-one years, sad and 
ill, seeming to have lost his occupation now that he 
had lost his enemy. Ah, what a true Corsican he 
was, and what an epic of the vendetta was the life of 
this diplomatist ! To my mind he is the type of a 
great tribal lord, the chief of a clan, and it is in this 

who counselled Alexander lo match upon Paris, although Napoleon 
had thrown himself on bis rear. 'And by this,' said the Emperor, ' by 
this single act he decided the fortunes of France and of European 
civilisation, and the face and destiny of the world.' — Minwrial dt 
Saintcllttfrte, lorue ui. pp. 43, 44. 



 



Corte and its Environs 1 05 

character that 1 call him up before me in his domain 
of Venaco under the colossal chestnut-trees, the oldest 
in Corsica. 

But, ' What had Napoleon done to this Carlo 
Andrea ? ' one asks one's self. 

On one of these enormous chestnut-trees — with a 
circumference of over 3 1 feet and a corresponding 
height — we gathered a mushroom as big as a child's 
umbrella. This parasite was living on the sap of the 
colossus, and perhaps it was jealous of it ! 

Our coachman asked us to give it him if we were 
not going to do anything with it. ' We eat them in 
Corsica,' he said. ' They are not as good as the chest- 
nuts, but they taste a little of them, and made into an 
omelette it is a dainty of the country.' 

We left him his Pozzo di Borgo — I mean his 
cryptogam. 

The first sight of Corte is absolutely startling. 
Turning round the Col San Pietro-di-Venaco one 
comes out suddenly upon a deep wide valley, shut in 
by high mountains, from which come two glittering 
streams, which clash like swords. And in very truth 
you would say there is a duel going on between the 
Tavignano, a rough knight in golden armour, and the 
Restonica, a proud Amazon in silver, a resounding 
duel, if there ever was one, the blows of which are 



 



io 

heard afar. The tourney goes on eternally in lists 
wasted and ravaged, where vines burnt and tortured 
by the phylloxera represent well enough a field of 
battle covered with bones calcined by the sun and 
picked dry by birds of prey. 

The amphitheatre is formed by the terraced 



heights of the Rotondo, and in the centre of the lists 
a rock 300 feet high, rolled there by some geological 
convulsion, on which a citadel has been erected, 
represents the balconies of the court and the umpires 
of the contest. 

Such is the appearance on your arrival. It is 
corroborated by the curious fact that the name of 
Corte means Court in Corsican Italian. 



 



Corte and its Environs 107 

The admirable situation of the town, as well from 
a strategical and defensive as from an artistic and 
picturesque point of view, is explained by the local 
tradition that Corte was founded by the Moors during 
their occupation of it in 713, that is in the time of 
Charlemagne, and that the Saracen kings established 
there one of their delicious summer residences. I 
for my part see no difficulty in this solution, and I 
agree heartily as to the probability of it, not being 
an authority in these questions. 

Moorish or not, there is no question that this rock, 
300 feet high, crowned by its citadel, and up which 
the houses giddily climb like ivy, produces a surpris- 
ing effect. Frowning and austere, it is planted in 
the centre of the island, and you feel that here beats 
the heart of this wild little race, whose history might 
have equalled that of the Greeks if only they had 
had a little more art to humanise them. Corte is 
Sparta with an acropolis ; in Paoli she had at once 
a Lycurgus and a Pausanias. 

I had often heard quoted a saying common with 
the islanders — the Corsican is French at Ajaccio, 
Italian at Bastia, Corsican at Corte. I understood its 
meaning at this last town. Corte is the true capital 
not only of independent Corsica, but of the Cyrnian 
spirit and character, and Pasquale Paoli is fhe incar- 
nation of it. 



 



io 

In Bonaparte you find, in equal proportions, indeed, 
but you find the three shades of the type, the Italian, 
Corsican, and French. In Paoli you only find the 
second, and this leads me to some reflections that I 
ask leave to submit to the Corsicans themselves, for a 
man should have the courage to hear the truth and to 
tell it always and everywhere 

This Paoli, whose ashes England has just sent 
back to Corte, is still, and much more even than 
Bonaparte, the real hero of Corsica, inasmuch as it is 
true that what is most valuable in the eyes of men is 
independence. 

They put it above glory, even such superhuman 
glory as Napoleon's : and this is what the philosopher 
should repeat from time to time both to nations and to 
kings, on pain of being called a wretched philosopher 
who knows nothing about his business. I was 
extremely struck at Corte with the predilection of the 
islanders, our hosts, for their Pasquale Paoli. 

Not certainly that I held in small esteem the 
energetic agitator, made illustrious by the friendship 
of Jean Jacques, but I thought like all continentals 
that he was eclipsed in the eyes of his fellow-country- 
men by the colossal personage whose name still 
troubles the world. But at the end of some zigzag- 
ging through towns and villages, hamlets and pastures, 
I was obliged to yield to evidence. 



 



Corte and its Environs iog 

The great Corsican, in Corsica, is not the one one 
supposes. The great Corsican, in Corsica, is he whose 
ashes rich England very sagaciously has just restored 
to his native country ; it is the Paoli who desired 
to liberate the island from all foreign domination, 
Genoese or French, republican or monarchical, and 
dreamed of making it independent ; it is the popular 
hero who was beaten at Ponte Nuovo. 

Bonaparte, who indeed, we must confess, did 
nothing for his countrymen, has not put out the light 
of this village hero. They brag indeed of Napoleon, 
but do they love him ? 

His birth at Ajaccio is only one of the country's 
curiosities, like the picturesque institution of the 
bandit and the vendetta. 

It depends upon the guide-books and it attracts 
tourists, but at the name of Paoli the old Cyrnian 
heart still beats the ckamade} 

Even at Ajaccio, the birthplace of our modern 
Ajax, any one who can observe will see the difference. 
Everything in the town speaks of Napoleon, but 
nothing prattles of him. I saw young English girls 
playing in the house in which he was born, startling 
inhabitants of that immortal dwelling. The house 
itself is only kept up, I think, by the care of the 

1 A roll of drums signifying surrender. 



 



i io 

Empress Eugenie, who has established in the second 
storey an old relative of the family. 

So that Bonaparte's cradle not only does not 
belong to the French nation, it is not even the 
property of the town. Is not that iconoclastic, 
my Emperor? 

Now at Corte, Paoli's house is 'municipal pro- 
perty.' It is the mairie, the school, and the museum. 
It is public, in good repair, and sacred. The 
Corsicans watch over it, and no doubt they will place 
there the ashes that England has restored for their 
veneration. 

They render full justice, however, to the efforts 
that Napoleon III. made to win them over to his 
uncle. His pious munificence has crowded Ajaccio 
with statues of Cxsar, and all the squares have one. 
It is true these statues, each more allegorical than 
the last, are so academic and so ' pumpous ' that they 
are enough to make any one turn nihilist. But the 
Corsicans hold in special esteem those which preside 
over fountains, because of the difficulty of getting 
water in the island. 

Napoleon III. gave them many of these fountains 
that he might have an opportunity of erecting many 
images of the great man, and the good Corsicans, 
enraptured, accepted all the images for the sake 01 
having the fountains. 



 



Corte and its Environs 1 1 1 

Neither marble nor bronze spoils water by being 
reflected in it, and whether it is Bonaparte, Abattucci, 
or Pozzo di Borgo who is mirrored there, so long as 
it is a Corsican it is all right, if the water is fresh 
and pure in the basin. 

But if it is Paoli, I say, as at Corte, then indeed 
it is a different thing, and whether the water be good 
or bad it still tastes of their native land. 

When we arrived at this haughty little town, with 
its two streams vociferating as they run into one 
another, there was a Corsican horse-race being run on 
the boulevard. 

This boulevard, which is a long shady avenue of 
plane-trees paved like an Italian street, opens on to 
the square just where the bronze statue of the Liber- 
ator rises over his fountain. This was the winning 
point of the steeple-chase, 

Mounted barebacked on their little black, hairy, 
neat-legged horses, young boys between fifteen and 
eighteen, lithe, strong, and eager, came at full gallop 
from the Bastia side, and the pavement of the street 
rang like bells as they passed. 

He who has not seen a Corsican on horseback 
has no idea what the intoxication of liberty means. 
Beneath their wide shepherds' hats with flapping 
brims the racers' eyes flashed fire like black 
diamonds. 



 



ii 

As in old bas-reliefs, they held the bridle in the 
left hand, and the right, raised to balance them, 
whipped the low branches of the planes as they 
passed, and marked the track of their course in 
the air. 

In this way they rode to Paoli's statue like an 
arrow to its mark, and as they came up to it they 
saluted it with such enthusiasm that it was un- 
necessary to be acquainted with the Corsican patois 
to understand what they were saying. 

One does not talk in this way to a fellow made 
of bronze unless he gives you some sort of 
answer. 

I do not know Corsican patois, but I understood 
perfectly well what that statue whispers in the 
mountain breezes to the young centaurs of the island 
where manna falls. 1 But it is not for me to repeat 
it ; the duty devolves upon my witty confrere, M, 
Emmanuel Arene, who is a child of the country, and 
who is teaching it to love our French Republic. He 
will not contradict me, all the same, if I observe with 
my history in my hand that Paoli was not a very 
passionate Gallophil, and that one could turn up 
easily many warmer friends of the good tricolour. 

It is even certain that the great Corsican tried to 

1 For manna fails in Corsica in spring, as in the desert of the Bible, 
and they make polenta of it. 



 



Corte and its Environs 1 13 

attach his pretty little island to the great island of 
Britain, like a little boat to a steamer. 

What I -mean to say is, that if Corsica is French, 
it is not the bronze fellow of Corte who should be 
congratulated upon it. 

The statue does not look towards Paris, no indeed ! 
At this century's end, truly full of trouble, and good 
only for map sellers, the map of Europe having been 
a little smudged by a great German thumb black 
with powder, even a poet surely, my dear Arene, 
should not be forbidden to express some patriotic 
anxiety ; and although the crow may knock down the 
nuts, that is no reason for not listening to it. 

Corsica is becoming too Paolist to be decidedly 
French, French without thought of change ; and 
whatever one may think about the Imperial system 
and the rule of Caesar which the other represents, 
still it is too much of an anomaly to make a Napoleon 
inferior to a Paoli and Ponte Nuovo of more import- 
ance than Waterloo. 

I think (you will allow me ?) such partiality 
significant, my dear comrade, and this ' return of the 
ashes' can be considered a good thing only if one 
has made up one's mind to consider Bonaparte as 
a mere Bernadotte, of stranger fortunes — which is 
severe ! 

There is another way of parrying the blow which 



 



 

threatens us, and of making Corsica part of us for ever, 
and that would be, nay, do not laugh ! that would 
be to civilise it ! 

It is, so to speak, in a savage state, and has been 
so neglected by the stepmother country that it fills 
one with shame. They have been ten years making 
the railroad from. Corte to Bastia, ten years for some 
forty-five miles, and Ajaccio has no railway. 

Some of my letters took a week to reach Paris 
and went by Italy! Others are still on their way. 

It is neglect pure and simple, and that rascal of a 
Paoli on the top of his fountain, whose water has a 
vague taste of independence, 1 points it out to them 
every day. 

Now, Muse, let us come down a peg ! 

In spite of the interest which the memory of the 
liberator of Corsica inspires in all visitors to Corte, 
there was another promised to my profane mind of a 

1 In Orezza, among Ihe chestnuts, there is a very good spring which 
belongs to the French government, and they send their sick there for 
cure, notably the soldiers come back from Tonquin. In a fortnight 
they are On their feet again and begin to walk about the island. Oh 
how beautiful (hey think it, how warm and green and blessed a land ! 
how Ihey would like to live there ! One of them, whom I met at 
Calenzana in an orange grove, a charming young fellow, intelligent and 
gentle, said to me with that sad smile which marks those who love 
France as she ought to be loved : 

'Tonquin, what is the good of it? Corsica has been ours for a 
hundred years ; it is richer than Algeria in things of ail kinds, and they 
have not yet begun to colonise it ! ' 

' Pardon me,' I said, ' we draw from there already — deputies I ' 



 



Corie and its Environs 1 1 5 

less elevated kind, perhaps, but more rare. I wanted 
to eat a ' peveronata.' 

What is a ' peveronata ' ? you will say. 

As for myself, I knew nothing at all about it. 
Only people had said to me, ' If you go to Corsica, do 
not fail to stop at Corte and taste the " peveronata." 
It is only there that they know how to make it.' 

1 Peveronata ' literally translated means something 
peppery, but that is no explanation. 

So on arriving at the H6tel de l'Europe, at the 
very entrance where worthy M. Pierraggi the pro- 
prietor met us, my first hungry cry was, ' Have you 
any " peveronata " ? ' 

At this unlucky question our host sighed, and his 
eye glanced sadly over the vast burnt vineyard which 
the microbe had brought to ruin. 

' Ah,' he said, ' there is no want of trout 1 it is 
the rest 1 ' The rest is grapes. Without grapes 
there can be no peveronata. 

In 1872 there were so many grapes round Corte 
that after having exported six millions' worth, the 
vine growers did not know what to do with the rest. 
They gave it away, and at last to make a little room 
in their cellars they finished by throwing the surplus 
of their vintage into the Restonica. The trout of 
this stream are famous. They dispute the palm for 
flavour with those of Lake Melo in the Rotondo, 



 



n 

which, experts say, are not so plump. They like the 
icy waters of the Restonica, in which, it seems, the 
ancient Corsicans used to dip their swords to give 
them a fine patina, and there they live and grow fat. 
When into their melted snow came these unknown 
torrents of red wine, the trout got drunk. They 
drifted down the stream on their backs, and were 
taken with the hand under the bridges. It occurred 
to some of the people of Corte to cook these drunkards 
and season them, and they found them divine. The 
' peveronata ' was discovered ! 

It is, in fact, nothing more than a bouillabaisse or 
fish soup made of one fish only, which is trout from a 
Corsican stream. It is worth them all. Bouillabaisse 
au vin, ladies and gentlemen ! But have you a good 
stomach and perfect digestion ? 

The fat trout (you must have it fat) is first cooked in 
olive oil, then thrown into an aromatic soup of Cor- 
sican wine mixed with capsicums, tomatoes, chillies, 
garlic in plenty, as much as you like, vinegar, pepper, 
pepper, pepper. No saffron, which surprised me ! 

I do not know how many minutes this terrible 
composition ought to be cooked ; but after you have 
eaten it you have an inferno within you. Dante 
himself would have been ill of it ! 

The success of this ' peveronata ' was considerable 
at Corte, even among that temperate people who live 



 



Corle and its Environs 1 1 7 

on polenta made of chestnuts. They allow, indeed, 
that it causes such thirst that you must drink for a 
day and a night to appease it. 

And so the cellars grew empty ready for the next 
year's vintage. Alas! since 1872 the poor Cortesians, 
dejected by the scourge which has half ruined them, 
have left off making ' peveronata.' As M. Pierraggi 
said, it is not trout that are wanting, it is the 
restl 

In default of this bouillabaisse abolished — pardon 
me the alliteration — we begged our host to procure 
us some ' broccio.' Although the season was advanced 
he promised us some for the next day, and he kept 
his word. ' Broccio ' is the national dish and the 
delicacy of Corsica. It is celebrated above all other 
cheeses, and he who has not tasted it does not know 
the island. The shepherds make it of the purest 
cream of their goats' milk in rush baskets ; it is of 
the colour of snow and perfumed with all the fragrance 
of the macchia. It has a delicious freshness and 
a VirgHian flavour. It is the kind certainly that 
Daphnis must have presented to Chloe. But profane 
continentals with little true bucolic feeling treat it 
like a petit Suisse. They pound it in rum with 
sugar, and thus these blase palates lose all the 
pastoral pleasure of its Elysian taste. I do not think 
the ' broccio ' would have a great success at Chevet's, 



 



1 1 8 A Wild Skeep Chase 

even IT It were from Bastelica itself. It seemed to 
me that at Corte even, where it cost two francs a 
cheese, it was losing, if not its renown, a little of its 
credit. Alcohol has for some time already begun its 
ravages among the sons of Sampiero : that fatal 
absinthe reigns on the Cours Paoli as well as on the 
Boulevard Montmartre, and I counted during my 
journey nearly forty notices of different bitters and 
appetisers in the windows of Corsican cafes. 

' Broccio ' has always been and still is a delicacy, 
and is only served in great hotels and on aristocratic 
tables. The vulgar have their ordinary cheese, for 
daily use, the ' caccia ' — a frightful " disc of sour 
Roquefort, smelling like a goat, and so strong that 
M. Vincent Bonnaud proposed to harness it to our 
landau to get us up the hills. He christened it 
explicitly the extra horse cheese. It certainly is of 
several horse power, and naturally is inevitable before, 
during, and after absinthe. 

I have said already that the Corsican race is not 
artistic, and that that is all that was wanting to make 
its history — full of battles of Marathon and Salamis, 
and rich in heroes like Miltiades, Themistocles, and 
Epaminondas — as important to humanity as that of 
the Hellenic peninsula. 

This heroic island, alas ! has no poets, painters, 
sculptors, musicians, or even architects — I would say 



 



Corte and its Environs 1 19 

why if I dared, but I should not be believed, and so 
it would be perfectly useless. 

All the art that this little nation, intellectual as it is, 
produces comes from the macckia and the mountains, 
and it is art in its infancy, primitive, without rules. 
The shepherds in their Alpine solitudes, beside the 
ice-cold lakes, wrapped in heavy cloaks of goat's hair, 
occupy themselves in roughly carving knotty pieces 
of cherry wood into pipes. But they achieve nothing 
beyond puerile work. The instinct of form is little 
developed ; the sense of beauty is wanting. No Giotto 
among them would be found drawing on the snow 
the profile of his favourite goat. 

I bought from one of them a carved powder-horn 
made of the root of the heather : it represents the 
head of an officer with a moustache, the ' brave 
general's ' perhaps, for Boulangism was raging in 
Corsica at the time of our excursion, and chromos 
intended to propagate it were poisoning the walls 
of all the taverns. This powder-horn is very 
discouraging. Has the Corsican no ideal but the 
military ? 

It was not given to me, to my great regret, to 
hear a ' vocero,' that is a funeral chant, most usually 
improvised by women over the corpse of their dead. 
The custom has been growing more and more rare, 
and the voceratrici who are left are known by name 



 



 

throughout the five districts. They are very aged, 
and are leaving no pupils behind them. 

But I was able to verify the fact, notably at Calvi, 
as I shall relate by and by, that the Corsican woman 
is endowed with the gift of lyric improvisation. 

At Isola Rossa some young people join in giving 
serenades. Have they any originality, and do they 
spring from an imagination peculiar to the joyous 
children of La Balagna ? That is just what I cannot 
decide, not having had time to study the question. 
But these serenades heard from afar seem to me to 
have an Italian rhythm. They had something of 
the modern troubadour as heard in the walking 
quintettes of the Genoese Riviera. 1 

Of the only two artists whom I heard of, one 
was a cutler of Piedipartino, a village of Orezza, and 
the other was a walking-stick maker at Corte. 

The cutler at Piedipartino is probably the last to 
temper, ornament, work in niello, and damaskeen the 

1 Literary archeology has been much occupied with these ' voceri ' 
or ' bucerati ' of Corsica, and M. Orioli has given us a fine collection of 
them. They are supposed to be the direct descendants of the Roman 
ninia, and consequently of the funeral songs of the Greeks from which 
it was derived. In old times they used to sing at funerals ; now they 
drink ! The only two countries in modern Europe where the nenia is 
still in use are Corsica and the Morea. In the Morea the ' vocero ' is 
called ' moiriologhi. ' Fauriel and the Count de Marcellus have trans- 
lated and published a number of these Hellenic songs, and the 
resemblance to the ' bucerati ' is sometimes so great that they are 
practically the same. 



 



Corte and its Environs 121 

famous Corsican stiletto of the old sort, which you 
find nowhere now, and which has only one sharp 
edge to its blade. Stilettos nowadays, like Catalan 
daggers, cut both sides, which is a heresy, and they 
have no ornament except on the sheath. They kill 
no doubt as well, but less artistically than the others, 
and the good man at Orezza was inconsolable about 
them. 

The walking-stick maker was a locksmith on the 
Piazza Paoli at Corte, and used to amuse himself on 
Sundays with making walking-sticks. He has a 
speciality of which Verdier himself, the walking-stick 
Shakespeare, is quite ignorant; and should these lines 
fall under the eyes of the painter Meissonnier, that 
great collector, they will set him dreaming. This 
speciality, which gives him a unique position in the 
world, is a stick made of heart of oak. Now can 
Meissonnier in his museum of sticks show one made 
of heart of oak ? If he cannot, what has he to make 
a show of? 

It is difficult to procure one of these works of art, 
not because they are very dear, but because in the 
first place the locksmith will only sell them to those 
whose faces take his fancy, and in the second because 
it is difficult to find the oak branches of which they 
are made either straight enough or long enough. 
He barks them and dissects them until he arrives at 



 



 

the original shoot, the first year's growth ; and often 
when he has reached it through the sheaths and 
coverings of woody flesh, he comes upon knots and 
invincible inequalities that even a blacksmith's tools 
can never get rid of. It is this that causes the rarity 
of the sticks. 

But how lovely they are, firm and smooth to the 
hand, with their ebony lacquer and their ferrules of 
copper and steel engraved with arabesques : O pale 
Verdier, what sticks are these ! Mine was made to 
measure : I mean the maker took the measure from 
my elbow to the ground so that it should be for ever 
proper and peculiar to myself and be my stick ! 

Equipped with such a masterpiece of art one 
can climb to the upper town, where is the only 
interesting building in Corte, Paoli's house ; and 
thither I went. Before I got there, as I was going 
along a street with wide stone steps made easy for 
donkeys and mules, not far from a pretty pyramidal 
fountain in whose circular basin limpid waters chant 
their crystalline hymn, I had pointed out to me the 
Corte Club. The seventy-six parishes and the .six 
dioceses of the island tremble before the Corte Club. 

The satire of its members is a proverb ; it carries 
on, they say, the sarcastic tradition of Minuto Grosso, 
Paoli's jester. I had never read that Paoli like 
Francis I. kept a fool, and heard it at Corte for the 



 



Corte and its Environs i 23 

first time. This fool like all fools, notably the one 
in the fable, sold wisdom. He sold it to Paoti in 
proverbs and maxims, like good Sancho Panza to 
Don Quixote. Proverbs are good sense in the form 
of sugar-plums. Minuto Grosso was the confectioner 
who made them. He took part in the Dictator's 
councils, and in the middle of their deliberations he 
would throw an almond into the treacle, some little 
phrase instinct with laughter. Minuto Grosso — in 
English, the Little Big — is claimed as the intel- 
lectual ancestor and patron saint of the terrible Corte 
Club. He was humpbacked, as a man must be to 
be witty. I know nothing more of this Corsican 
Triboulet, whose patriotism was second to that of 
none of his countrymen. 

The ' palazzo di Corte,' or Paoli's house, is a 
building serving two purposes, being at once the 
school and the prison of the town, and you may add 
if you please the museum. In the part used for the 
prison, the lower part of the building, I saw the 
day I went a very strange spectacle. A miserable 
drunkard, picked up in the gutter the night before, 
was clinging by his hands and feet to the bars of a 
window, and howling frantically for something to 
drink with a fearful cry made a hundred times 
louder by the echoing streets. All the upper town 
was agitated by it. 



 



 

It was impossible to silence him. Haggard, 
convulsed, and livid, he went on crying for water for 
more than fourteen hours. You could see from the 
street the warders pulling at his legs and trying to 
make him let go the bars. I never in my life beheld 
anything more horrible than this miserable wretch, a 
victim to incredible tortures, posing unconsciously as 
a lurid figure in one of Dante's circles. 

People in pity had held up their flasks to him, 
but he could not reach them. He did not see them. 
Hanging like a monkey to his cage, he went on 
howling, and doubtless in the shadowy plains of 
delirium he could see before him streams of delicious 
water, cool and clear, rippling between their banks. 

Children were climbing the stairs to the school 
above. 

This prison of Corte is denounced, moreover, and 
devoted to the infernal gods by all the Corsicans. I 
promised to make myself the mouthpiece of the far 
too just execrations that they heap upon it. I will 
keep my word, although the feeble voice of a humble 
literary man does not carry far. 

Its insanitary condition borders on murder. 

Blanqui, the social economist, in the course of the 
industrial inquiries that he conducted throughout the 
departments, declared as early as 1840 that he 
considered the Corte prison to be an ' outrage to 



 



Corte and its Environs 1 25 

humanity.' The expression made a noise at the 
time; but we are now in 1S90 and its state is still 
the same, or pretty nearly so. If the ground-floor 
where the warders live is so damp that they cannot 
keep their situations, what is to be said for the cellars 
and the cellars below cellars where the prisoners are 
shut up ? For three quarters of the time they are 
inundated. ' The most robust grow mouldy there in 
six months,' a man of the place said to me, using 
a striking figure. The refined and oriental cruelty 
of the Council of Ten at Venice never reduced 
criminals to such misery, and death by putrefaction 
. is a torture only inflicted at Corte. 

They add, however, poisoning by infection. 

There is a famous leathern pipe, said to be for 
ventilation, which has been a channel for disease 
from time immemorial. It comes up from the sub- 
terranean cellars, passing through the upper stories, 
which it poisons through cracks which are never 
mended, and debouches (there should be a stronger 
word) into the halls of the college museum. They 
are obliged sometimes to break the windows there in 
order to breathe. This is literally true. 

If this college museum were only a museum, it 
would not be worth while to complain, for since the 
death of Cardinal Fesch nobody has ever set foot 
in the rooms where the pictures he left them are 



 



 

growing dim with smoke. Probably I am the only 
traveller that ever asked to see these canvases. 
But the college museum is also a college, and the 
children of the town go there that they may make 
use of another bequest, Paoli's gift for his country- 
men's education. Being desirous to withdraw them 
from the influence of the Italian clergy, he left in 
his will a considerable sum to the municipality of 
Corte for the support of the liberal university with 
four professorships which he had founded in the 
town in 1 764. This university did not prosper, and 
the combat came to an end for want of combatants. 
But it has been replaced by a secondary school 
which is attended by 1 20 pupils ; and if the children 
enjoy the privilege of being taught in rooms hung 
round with a certain number of good Italian pictures, 
one does not see the necessity of punishing them 
for it by exposing them twice a day to typhoid 
fever. 

If these lines should be read by any of our 
' governors,' let him meditate on the leathern pipe 
at Corte ; and remembering how small a thing will 
sometimes make a man popular, let him consider 
that the people have been waiting for some sanitary 
measure for fifty years, and let him take action. 

The mothers of Corte are afraid any longer to 
send their little ones to school. 



 



Corte and its Environs 1 2 7 

If this palace of all work at Corte excites 
curiosity in any other way, and it does, it is by the 
historical recollections that it calls up, recollections 
dear, and rightly so, to its citizens. For as to the 
paintings by which it is encumbered rather than 
adorned, I do not know what to say. They do not, 
even for form's sake, take any care of them. They 
are falling into utter ruin ; the paint is peeling off the 
canvas and hanging over the frames in flakes. Yet 
there are some, if not fine, at least important pieces 
of the different schools of Italy from masters of the 
second class. But how is it possible to form any 
judgment of them ? how even to see them ? They 
are in depths of shadow, and immemorial spiders' 
webs have interposed their dusty veils between the 
eye of the spectator and these cracked and blackened 



Poor Joseph Fesch ! If he could see what they 
have done with his collection in Corsica ! However, 
it is nothing at Corte ; it is at Bastia that the whole 
extent of the disaster is to be seen. No, they arc 
not artists, my good Cardinal, your cousins are not 
indeed. Ah, sapristi ! 

Paoli's room, which the Rector of the school was 
obliging enough to let us see, is the library. It con- 
tains manuscripts of great interest, it seems, and all 
the papers relative to the War of Independence issued 



 



 

by the Council of Nine. The Dictator, to guard 
against attack, had protected his windows with 
shutters of cork three inches thick. They are there 
still. He understood his people's character. They 
say that besides a guard of twenty-four men on duty 
day and night, he had always near him some sturdy 
mastiffs with formidable fangs, who acknowledged 
no authority but his and his fool's. 

The pillars, the famous pillars of the throne, 
which the astonished 'Nine' saw one day suddenly 
set up in the Council Chamber, are also preserved. 
The good Rector smiles as he shows them to us, and 
tries to see from our faces whether we know the 
strange story of the throne, which many Corsicans 
angrily deny, though it is a very likely one. 

The idea of having himself elected King of 
Corsica must have passed throtigh Paoli's head. It 
was quite a rational one, and agreed with the taste 
for autonomy which the islanders have always had, 
and have still in my opinion. If one is to have 
independence, one cannot have too much of it. 
Napoleon himself in his Memoirs confesses that 
after the abdication at Fontainebleau he thought of 
retiring to his native island ' with his fifty thousand 
Corsicans' and asking the allies to give him the 
government and hereditary sceptre of it. That 
would have been better, perhaps, than giving up his 



 



Corte and its Environs i 29 

sword to England. Isle for isle, Cyrnos was as 
good as St, Helena. And the Corsicans, you may 
be sure, would have been enthusiastic for the 
arrangement. 

However that might be, Paoli had the same 
dream. One day the Nine found in the Council 
Chamber a throne sprung up, as if by accident, in 
the place where the General usually sat. They 
looked at one another and went out. The play was 
a failure. Paoli understood, and never tried again. 
Minuto Grosso must have said something sharp 
about it, and probably this was the origin of the 
cork shutters. 

The good Rector confides to my ear that he has 
dealt with this curious, quite Shakespearian scene in 
verse, and sent it to the Figaro for the Supplement. 
He has heard nothing about it. I promise to speak 
to M. Perivier on the subject, and thus escape 
having it read to me, as he kindly threatened to do. 

Verses when one is on, non 
erat his locus, as Horace says. 1 

1 This is what Gregorovius says about the mouflon; — 'The 
Corsica.il wild sheep, the Muffro or Mufflone, is a very interesting 
animal peculiar to the island. He is a fine beast, with spiral horns, 
dark brown, and silky haired, with sturdy limbs. He lives in the 
region of eternal snow, and goes up higher and higher as the summer 
sun melts the snow on the mountain. In the day time he roams about 
n tarns, where he finds green pasture; at night he returns to 
For the mouflon sleeps on the snow, and on the snow the 



 



1  

female brings forth her young. The mouflons, like the chamois, post 
sentinels for their protection. During the severity of the winter, when 
the deep snow covers their pastures, these wild sheep sometimes join 
company with the shepherds' goats, and you may often see them in the 
valleys of Vivario, Niolo, and Guagno, feeding quietly with the flocks. 

'The young sheep can be tamed and becomes docile, but not the 
old. They are frequently hunted, and when you hear the mountain 
resounding to the tumult of the chase, and the muskets giving forth 
the roll of their thunder, you know at once in Corsica that it is a 
battue of mouflons — or bandits ! United by the tie of a wild fraternity 
they both inhabit the mountain, up which they climb to the line of 
eternal snow.' — Ferdinand Gregorovius, Corsica, torn. ii. Bastia, 1884. 

If you like good style, here is good style if you like, and I need 
not say that the author is a German. But in spite of all this about the 
snow selected by the mouflonne for her lying-in, and the mouflon's 
gallantries among the goats, and the wild fraternity between the poor 
innocent creatures and the bandits, there is information in this passage 
from Doctor ■ Gregorovius which no good mouflon hunter should 
neglect. Well, good hunters are we I 

Tally ho ! tally ho ! Let our muskets make the mountains- echo 
with the roll of their thunder, and let the sons of Nemorino tremble in 
their green meadows on the banks of the lakes ! 



 



CHAPTER IV 

LA SCALA DI SANTA REGINA 

La Scala di Santa Regina — Soveria — Cervoni and Pope Pius VII.— A 
Corsican mother— The Devil's Bridge— A legend of engineering— 
The Poggi saw-mill — The Golo — A mule.track — The bandit's son- 
Carrying arms — Philosophical reflections — The gorges, description — 
Albertacce — Hospitality — The bandit — Monte Cinto — The Oriandist 
party— A song of 1789. 

Now I must tell you that the Cortesians (or 
Cortinese, both words are used), and notably our 
host M. Pierraggi, had been of one opinion : if the 
mouflon was anywhere, it could only be in the 
gorges of Santa Regina and nowhere else, that place 
being as wild as you could wish, and suited to poor 
creatures which man so persistently pursues and 
massacres that there are none left anywhere. 

To visit these magnificent gorges we must take 
a roundabout and adventurous route ; we must 



 



 

renounce the delights of the new railway which 
connects Corte and Bastia, and to whose battlemented 
station (mercy t it is battlemented indeed) the whistle 
of civilisation summoned us ; and after crossing a 
certain Devil's Bridge, we must plunge into a wild 
defile full of legends, and rich in ambuscades, along 
a mule-track running by the edge of the precipice, 
at the end of which was Monte Cinto. 

Ah ! if Monte Cinto had not been at the end of 
this mule-track, no doubt we should have continued 
the pursuit of the mouflon only on the blue lakes of 
our dreams 1 But this Monte Cinto is the peak 
nearest to the stars of all that Corsica possesses. 
It pierces the sky, making a hole 8890 feet deep, and 
the leader of bur expedition was no trifler or trimmer 
with such attractions as this before him. It was 
resolved, therefore, that we should make this elbow. 

Victuals for three days were crammed into 
baskets, and piled up in the carriages ; our guns were 
cleaned, and though not a cartridge was missing from 
our cartridge boxes, the number was doubled for 
the sake of prudence, with ideas offensive and 
defensive, if you like, but certainly explosive. There 
must at any rate be some fine echoes in the defile 
which is the bed of the Golo ; and when there is no 
mouflon you may as well fire for echoes. 

The only village of any importance that you pass 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 133 

before the Devil's Bridge is Soveria, but it is worth 
stopping at. How fine is its haughty profile on the 
mountain ! I should have been astonished if it had 
not given Corsica a man, and if nothing energetic had 
issued from this eagle's nest. It did not surprise me 
to hear that Soveria was the birthplace of one of the 
surliest brutes of the Imperial epic, General Cervoni, 
who was killed at the age of forty-one at the battle 
of Eckmuhl. 

This general is the hero of rather an amusing story. 
He it was who was sent by Napoleon to the Vatican 
to signify to the successor of St. Peter that he was 
definitely dispossessed of his precious temporal power. 

Rome n'est plus dans Rome, elle est toute ou je suis. 

The mission was not one of the most agreeable. 
Cervoni acquitted himself with such soldierly 
roughness that the unhappy Pius VII. was quite 
appalled. The general belonged to the literary 
and diplomatic school of Cambronne. Some years 
after, when the Pope came to Paris for the 
Imperial coronation, Cervoni with the other officers 
had in his turn to salute the pontiff, and he did 
it in a stentorian voice with that half-Italian accent 
which marks the Corsican. Pius VII. had some 
vague recollection of the voice ; it brought back to 
him some unpleasant moment in his career. He 



 



1  

raised his head, looked at the general, and compli- 
mented him on speaking the harmonious Langue du si. 

' You are Italian ? ' he said. 

' Almost, holy father,' answered Cervoni in a voice 
of thunder. 

' Eh ! eh ! ' said the Pope, smiling and coming 
forward to bless him. 

' Yes, I am a Corsican.' 

' Ah ! ah! ah !' And Pius VII. drew back timidly. 

' I am Cervoni ! ' said the soldier, moderating his 
blare. 

' Cervoni ? Diavolo ! ' And the old man literally 
took to flight. 

The general's father, Tome Cervoni, had himself 
been a soldier of repute ; and had taken part in 
the war of Corsican independence under Paoli. He 
was one of his captains. Having taken umbrage: — 
I do not know what about — at the Dictator, he 
retired to Soveria, to his mother, a woman of great 
nobleness of character and impassioned patriotism. 
One day they heard in the village that Paoli had been 
surprised by his enemy Matra and driven into a 
convent, that they were about to set 6re to it and he 
must perish. Now Paoli was the incarnation of their 
country. No injury could prevent a good Corsican 
from recognising and acknowledging that. 

1 Go 1 ' said his mother, bringing him his carbine. 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 1 35 

But Tome hesitated, being vindictive like all his 
countrymen, and not knowing how to forgive. The old 
woman opened the door with an imperious gesture — 

' Go 1 ' she said a second time. 

The cause of the quarrel must have been serious, 
for the captain could not make up his mind to obey, 

' No, mother ! ' he said. 

' Then cursed be the milk with which I suckled 
thee ! ' cried the woman of the mountain, with an 
^Eschylean malediction which has become a proverb 
in the island. 

' Go ! ' she said again. 

Tome Cervoni rose, pale as death, took his gun, 
gathered together forty men of the neighbourhood, 
and went to deliver Faoli in the convent of Bozzio. 
He killed the traitor Matra, a partisan of the Genoese, 
with his own hand, and that done returned to Soveria 
without shaking hands with the national hero, or even 
seeing him. 

He came back to his house, put his gun down in 
the corner, and sitting down by the hearth said, 

' Mother, I have obeyed you 1 ' 

' Good,' she said, ' here is the polenta for supper.' 

Faoli was obliged to come himself to Soveria 
to thank his deliverer. You can read the whole 
Corsican character in this story, which is very popular 
with the islanders and is still waiting for a poet 



 



 

The Devil's Bridge 

I shall shock nobody by saying that the Devil's 
Bridge is a bridge, and I shall please a great many by 
saying that it is a fine bridge. We admired it long. 
An engineer would say, ' It is a remarkable work of 
art.' But its principal merit in my eyes is that it 
allows the traveller to cross the Golo with dry feet, 
which was very difficult before it was built; 

This is clear from a legend attached to it belong- 
ing to the time, not very far removed from our own, 
when any one going from Corte to Bastia might be 
obliged to wait until the river quieted down and left off 
hurrying along, besides its trout, enormous rocks, and 
even trunks of uprooted trees, like Ruysdael's rivers. 

It is from this legend that it gets the name of the 
Devil's Bridge, which the engineers themselves poeti- 
cally gave it. Imaginative engineers certainly, and 
cunning as monkeys, engineers who knew very well 
what to do to advertise a ' work of art ' and make it 
a reputation. 

The story, then, is told and retold how once 
upon a time, when the roaring Golo was only to be 
crossed by means of a movable plank thrown from 
one bank to the other as best one could and always 
with danger, a man from Corte arrived one evening 
at the bank. He was urging on a fiery horse, and 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 137 

seemed impatient to pursue his way. Unhappily the 
recent melting of the snow had so greatly increased 
the Force of the torrent that it was carrying along 
blocks of stone as big as' houseSj and floating a whole 
forest of trunks and branches. 

The rider grew desperate and began to. tear his 
hair under his baretta. 

' My God 1 my God ! ' he groaned, ' I shall never 
reach Bast! a in time to save my brother ! Every 
minute that I lose brings him ' nearer to the igno- 
minfous death of a criminal, and I have indisputable 
proofs of his innocence ! O my God ! how shall I 
cross this accursed stream ! Stop the course of it, 
O Lord ! or stop the still more .rapid course of 
justice.' 

So the miserable man was praying when suddenly 
out of a grotto close at hand came a beautiful 
woman. Nobody in the pievt could have said where 
she came from or how she had installed herself at the 
passage of the Golo. They only knew that she was 
called Regina, that she was a virgin and loved God. 
This ascetic, as beautiful as an angel, but even more 
incorporeal, lived, no one knew how, a life of 
penitence, and her work it was to place the plank 
across the torrent without exacting any payment 
from travellers except a prayer for her soul's salvation. 

The rider's sad words had moved her deeply. 



 



 

' My brother is innocent ! ' he cried aloud in the 
midst of the uproar; 'innocent! innocent! If I do 
not arrive in time to convince the judges of his inno- 
cence there cannot be a God in heaven.' 

' There is a God,' said Regina, coming near the 
traveller. ' Let us kneel down and pray to Him.' 

Alas ! it seemed as though God were deaf, and in 
the tremendous deafening uproar could not distinguish 
the prayer of His handmaiden from all the other 
prayers that were being addressed to Him at the same 
time from other torrents in the universe. No miracle 
was wrought to quiet the furious Golo. 

Regina was as holy as she was beautiful, and crafty 
as she was holy. She had recourse to a ruse. 

She rose, therefore, and standing up, white and pale, 
in a solemn voice uttered these words, ' Whosoever in 
heaven or earth can and will build a bridge here 
before cockcrow, I will be his, body and soul.' 

' Done ! ' said Mephistopheles, rising instantly, and 
the bargain was concluded. 

Myriads of little devils appeared with trowels and 
shovels and mattocks and wheelbarrows and buckets 
and squares and bags of cement and the rest of it, 
and set themselves to work with hands and feet and 
tail to construct this bridge in one night. Mephisto 
with his plan in front of him, upside down of course, 
was directing the works by the light of the moon. 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 1 39 

By five o'clock in the morning the bridge was 
finished, and the man spurred his horse across it and 
reached the court at Bastia in no time. Then the 
devil turned and saluted Santa Regina with his 
usual politeness, ' The cock has not yet crowed, 
madam, and you see the bridge is finished to your 
orders. Your soul, if you please !' 

' Excuse me, sir, but your bridge is not finished — 
at least not as such a noble bridge ought to be.' 

' And what, is wanting still ? ' 

' Why, the signature of the author ! ' 

' That is true ! ' said the simple devil. 

And he ran to put his mark to his work of art, 
as innocently as a poet ! 

But while he was going Regina, inspired from 
above, gave a mighty stamp in her poultry-yard, and 
the cock, the deliverer, awoke and crowed. 

Rather a commonplace legend, perhaps, this of 
the Devil's Bridge, and very little different from others 
which engineers with their dull imagination attach to 
most bridges. But heard as we heard it on the spot 
itself at the entrance of the defile, told by a very 
agreeable Corsican, an engineer himself, with whom 
we were going to breakfast, it took a warmer 
glow. 

M. Poggi, our host, has set up a fine sawmill on 
the Golo for the purpose of turning to account on the 



 



 

spot the trees which are cut down by the state, the 
official woodman, in the neighbouring forests. The 
stream which works the mill floats the materials to 
it also, and all would go on to perfection in this 
ingenious and model factory if its proprietor could 
succeed in making the Corsicans work. 

But the Corsicans do not like work, and M. Poggi, 
to his great vexation, is obliged to enlist Italian 
workmen who are called ' Lucchesi.' For it has 
become the habit to class under the name of ' Lucca 
fellows ' all those artisans from the peninsula who 
from time immemorial have come to Corsica to 
make a winter hoard for themselves, profiting by 
the gentlemanly indolence of the inhabitants. 

An admirable breakfast, served in the mill itself, 
helps us to sympathise with our host's patriotic 
vexation, and we drink to it sadly. 

I should not ask ten years' time for the defile 
of Santa Regina in Corsica— if it were known — to 
become as famous as any of the ravines in Switzerland 
or the Pyrenees which guide-books and tourists most 
extol, for it has every beauty. 

We may say we almost discovered it I have 
not noticed at least that any other excursionists have 
explored it, or if they have done so they have not 
rendered justice to its magnificence. 

The ascent begins about a mile and a quarter 



 



La Scata di Santa Regina 141 

from M. Poggi's sawmill, and you start by a road cut 
in wide zigzags up the side of the mountain. It is 
also a remarkable work of art, and its sole defect 
is that it stops short, being unfinished, and ends 
in nothing. At least it was so in September 
188;. 

The Golo flows on the left hand, and the farther 
you leave it behind as you go up towards the eagles* 
domain, the more furiously it seems to roar and 
groan with the deafening noise of its waterfalls. 

Just where the road stops there is a little wooden 
hut where you can fill your brandy flask and get a 
crust of bread. Here you must give up easy driving 
in carriages and take to riding. Fine tinkling mules 
are waiting for us ready saddled, and they undertake 
to convey us with unstumbling feet over the giddiest 
spots. 

Where is the road ? I see none at all. 

When you can see no vestige of a road on a 
mountain, it is called in mountaineers' language ' a 
mule-track.' 

Well, now for the mule-track. But where is it ? 

M. Vincent Bonnaud points out something moving 
there opposite. I can only distinguish that there 
the stones, loosened no doubt by the water, are rolling 
down one after another. They are rattling down 
like hail. That is it ! Broumm I 



 



 

Suddenly a French soldier in uniform comes out 
of the little hut, loads his rifle, and plants himself 
before us in an inexplicable manner. 



Then a loud report is heard all over the defile, 
reverberating from the granite walls, and three eagles 
leave their peaks and come hovering on wide wings 
over our heads. ' Vive Napoleon ! Vive Orlando 
Bonaparte 1 ' It is a dynastic demonstration. 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 143 

Our young prince leaps down from the mule 
which he is already bestriding, and goes straight up 
to red-breeches. ' My friend,' he says, ' we are under 
a republic' 

But the soldier will not give in. He is a Corsican, 
and a Corsican of the Niolo, that is to say, the 
wildest and least civilised canton of the department, 
the canton we are in. He has finished his time 
of service, and is going to join his father, a famous 
bandit, who has taken refuge in the macchia of 
Monte Cinto, near Albertacce. Here, M£rimee, 
is a man who has not been calmed down by_ the 
discipline of the regiment ! 

' Vive Napoleon I Vive Orlando Bonaparte 1 ' and 
another report 1 Patapoum — poum — poum — poum ! 
And again the eagles waltz round and hover over us. 

It is impossible to moderate the enthusiasm of 
this wild Dumanet. He has got his Bonaparte into 
a corner and will not let him go. He must yield. 
Lucien's grandson gets himself out of the difficulty 
by a grand stroke of policy — by what he calls 
Balzacian policy, that is, a thing based upon the 
knowledge of man ! He draws the soldier aside and 
says something in his ear. 

There is a new report. Patapoum — poum — 
poum — poum ! But this time the cry is ' Vive la 
Ripubl iquc 1 ' 



 



144 A Wild Skeep Chase 

The eagles fly away and disappear. That was 
what we wanted. The omen was too dangerous. 

A few minutes after, when we were going along the 
mule-track, we asked our friend what artifice he had 
made use of to bring about this sudden change in a 
madman of this stamp, the son of a bandit, and 
perhaps a bandit himself one_ day. 

' I promised to obtain his father's pardon from 
M. Grevy.' 

' What ! from M. Grevy, president of ■?' 

' The French Republic : all Corsicans are but men, 
and all men are but Corsicans 1 ' 

And here come in naturally my reflections on 
that question of ' carrying arms,' one of those which 
in Corsica are always presenting their preposterous 
notes of interrogation before the ethnographic student. 
We must not forget that our little journey is essen- 
tially a philosophical one, made under the guidance 
of Sterne, rather than of Malte-Brun. 

Corsica has privileges which none of our other 
departments enjoy, and the most characteristic of 
them is that of being always armed to the 
teeth. 

There is not a Corsican who does not carry his 
gun slung on his back, not only on the high road, 
but also in the towns, the public promenades and 
market-places, and not as a harmless plaything, as 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 145 

we continentals carry an innocent walking-stick or 
a prudent umbrella, but duly loaded with its two 
cartridges, not to mention those which are carried at 
his belt in his cartera. So that the Corsican is 
always, as you may say, on a war footing, and ready 
to support his opinions with that irresistible argument 
which extinguishes an opponent. If you add that 
no one on earth is more irascible, punctilious, suspi- 
cious, revengeful, and quarrelsome than he, you will 
see at once, leaving out of the question such accidents 
as we have spoken of, what results civilisation reaps 
from this privilege of carrying arms, solely and 
specially conferred on the Cyrnian. 

I am bold to say that the vendetta as naturally 
flows from it as a fragrant resin from the trunk of 
a tree. 

If the government seriously desired to see the 
vendetta disappear, it would only have to forbid the 
carrying of arms in Corsica, for opportunity makes 
the rogue, as proverbs say, and the temptation to 
make use of that delightful sonorous gunpowder 
which you have just got is so great, that Seneca 
himself, who was once exiled to these shores, would 
not have been able to resist, philosopher as he was 
— at least I fancy not. 

But the government does not really wish to 
abolish the vendetta, I am convinced, because this 



 



1  

romantic nonsense attracts travellers to the island 
and consequently brings capital. 

Burgundy has its wines, Normandy its cattle, 
Provence its oil, and Corsica has its vendetta. It 
lives by its vendetta. 

This is the only industry which brings it in any- 
thing and enables it to pay its taxes, although they 
are light, to its mother country. When the bandit 
goes, everything will go with him ! 

The English come in numbers and leave money 
behind at Ajaccio, Bastia, Calvi, everywhere in fact 
For the vendetta is an article that you can only find 
in the environs of these French towns, or perhaps 
in Oceania among the last savages whom civilisation, 
armed with the Bible, is hunting down, and Oceania 
is a very long way off. Everybody cannot afford 
to go there, while one can be at Ajaccio in twelve 
hours. 

The privilege of carrying arms, thanks to the 
solicitude of the government, preserves and prolongs 
and renders productive this blessed vendetta, the 
principal resource of the country, and its ethno- 
graphical interest in the eyes of a philosopher. 

The young Corsican, as soon as he leaves the 
Paoli school, begins to practise on rabbits, then on 
foxes, and at last on his countrymen. 

He begins by the chase and he ends by assassin- 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 147 

ation, if you may rightly use the word assassination 
in reference to the brilliant and traditional feats of 
arms which are the boast of good shots. 

Besides, if you once allow them to have the 
powder of the State, how can you require them to let 
it spoil in their powder flasks ? 

In that explosive island, I lived literally in a 
continual salvo of artillery, and my clothes still 
smell of saltpetre. 

Guns and muskets t The roads were bristling 
with them ! 

As we left, pan ! pan ! pan ! As we arrived, 
patapan ! patapan ! — All along the road, in all the 
villages, at the bridges, the inns, at the waterfalls 
everywhere stood men armed with these noisy 
implements. When one escort of thirty guns left 
us, it was only to be replaced by thirty others more 
deafening still. We seemed to be rolling in our 
carriage over percussion caps. I have never so 
heartily cursed the monk who invented that mis- 
chievous mixture of sulphur, charcoal, and saltpetre. 
Twenty times over we narrowly escaped the loss, if 
not of our lives, at least of our eyes. 

They hunted up out of the depths of immemorial 
barns old arquebuses of the age of Sampierro, 
Genoese matchlocks of unknown antiquity, old iron 
tubes full of holes and falling to pieces, and loaded 



 



 

them up to the muzzle till they burst in their hands, 
right under our noses and in our hair, which was 
standing on end with fright. And they were happy, 
oh, so happy ! The gun is all in all for the 
Corsican, for it gives him a delusive feeling of being 
independent still. But he plays too much with it, 
that is the fact, and it takes away his confidence in 
Justice, who is only armed with a pair of scales. 

None of the members of our little caravan show 
any serious inclination for the profession of a bandit, 
not even our excellent photographer, M. PhUippon 
of Versailles, though he has a hard time with us. 
We are every minute requiring him to get out his 
apparatus and bring it to bear on points of view 
which our rising enthusiasm chooses for him, and 
really we are too much for him in spite of his good 
will. But he declares that if, for some photographic 
misdeed or other, he should be obliged to take to 
the macckia, it would be in the gorges of this 
sublime defile that he would take refuge — and we 
unanimously agree with him. 

These astounding granite walls, inlaid with mosaics 
of porphyry and marble, clothed with a gigantic 
velvety moss of forests of lariccio pine, are carved 
into shapes and profiles so varied in outline, so rich 
in form, so grand in character, that one stands before 
them open-mouthed and confounded. Sometimes 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 149 

the ravine narrows, and then there seems to open 
out before you the nave of an immense cathedral, 
the nearer rocks, furrowed by the rain, taking on the 
appearance of an organ, while in the distance rises 
the tabernacle over the high altar with its candelabra 
of quartz. 

Twenty steps farther on are petrified Babylons 
with the ramparts and towers and monuments, 
looking as if they had been left on an inaccessible 
plateau by some retreat of the sea. 

At other times you can imagine aerial castles, 
regular and scientific piles of squared blocks forming 
fortifications like those that enclosed towns in the 
feudal times. To this picture succeeds one represent- 
ing a little Vesuvius during an eruption, pouring out 
on all sides its streams of liquid lava, which are 
really springs of water leaping forth from their source 
in cascades. Then at the next turn you see a lake 
shining out among the larches, like a mirror of Venus 
left lying on the grass. 

This so-called ' mule-track,' a kind of rugged slide 
of loose rolling stones, up which our mules move, 
hanging over the edge, winds about under over- 
hanging rocks and along the edge of the precipice, 
It is fearful, a Firanesi staircase on which lizards 
with their lithe, crocodile bodies lie happily basking 
in the sun like emerald clasps. I never saw any- 



 



1  

where as many lizards as in Corsica, nor as pretty 
ones. But alas, what a fear they have of man ! 

To the left, bathed in purple shadow, through 
which rise some rosy peaks, the Scala di Santa Regina 
masses itself darkly in mysterious gloom. To the 
right it is a blaze of splendour. The roar of the Golo 
sometimes dies away and then is heard again ; and 
there is nothing comparable to the sort of delicious 
anguish which is upon you during the perpendicular 
ascent, steeper a hundred times than the road to 
Paradise. While we were going in single file, some 
on foot and some on the mules, I employed myself 
in making my guide, a silent thoughtful man, talk ; 
for I do not know why, I had from the first suspected ■ 
that he could tell some good stories. 

On setting out he had looked at me with a 
searching, almost uneasy, look, as if he were question- 
ing whether it were possible or natural that there 
should be any one on the earth so gay as I was, 
but the inspection terminated in a benevolent smile. 
The Corsican took my measure correctly, that is as 
nothing more or less than a simple artist, and a 
quite inoffensive being. He overwhelmed me with 
attentions all through the rocky march, which was 
made almost painful to me by my unskilful horse- 
manship. 

The giddy torrent of the Golo seemed to have 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 1 5 1 

hold of my legs sometimes, especially at certain 
turns, and in all my joints I regretted bitterly that 
I had not been born a goat. This Golo clamoured 
and howled. He called me by my name, uttering 
strident and ironical yells that only Weber could 
have harmonised. At last I could laugh no more, 
in spite of the splendid scenery and the exquisite 
beauty of the weather. 

My muleteer perceived my condition, and as 
giddiness is a disease that must be fought by 
distracting your attention, he put himself between 
me and the abyss, and began to unlock his mouth. 
We were passing at the moment near a hamlet 
high up on the mountain, the name of which he told 
me, but I have forgotten it, not indeed having rightly 
heard it. 

' It was from up there, 1 he said, ' that poor Taddeo 
Carpi came.' And he sighed. 

1 Taddeo Carpi ? ' I asked, ' who was that ? ' 

1 Taddeo Carpi was the tax collector at X . 

He had been educated on the Continent, and was gay 
like you, sir. He would laugh at nothing. Nobody 
would have thought him capable of the crime. But 
the Continent ! the Continent 1 It is our ruin ! It 
is not good for Corsicans to go to Marseilles even. 
But as for Paris,' and he shook his head significantly. 
' But Taddeo had got his education in Paris, and 



 



 

came back to be the tax collector in one of our 
towns. He was very much liked because of this 
good humour, which is popular everywhere, though 
it does not agree with our manners, and the " Parisian " 
had a triumph every Sunday and fete-day. All of 
a sudden his humour changed. Nothing passes 
unnoticed here, where we are thrown together so 
much and are all relations. 

' Taddeo Carpi's demeanour became strange. He 
seemed distrait and inattentive : he would suddenly 
turn red, and sometimes you would catch strange 
suspicious glances from his black eyes. You would 
have said he was trying to see on all sides of him at 
once. If you entered his little office suddenly, with- 
out knocking, you would find him with his head buried 
in his hands, lost in a reverie, and when aroused he 
would look as startled and alarmed as a miser caught 
coming from the place where his gold is hidden. 

1 In the evening Angelina, his little girl, whom he 
adored, coming quietly to climb on the back of his 
chair while he was doing his accounts, Taddeo 
turned upon her with such a savage air that the child 
was frightened and took refuge in her terrified 
mother's petticoats. 

' All this gave plenty to talk about under the 
statue of the Madonna which is over the fountain, 
and tongues began to do their viper work. 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 153 

' Taddeo, who was a man about forty, had been 
honoured in the district both for his personal merits 
and for the name he bore. The Carpi family be- 
long to the Caporali, the nobility of Corsican liberty. 
Their probity is proverbial in a land where even 
bandits are honest. 

1 At the express desire of his mother, who was a 
woman of great intelligence and celebrated beauty, 
Taddeo had studied in Paris, but he returned to 

settle in X . He had married a relation, 

Catarina Bellini, the daughter of a cousin at Bastia, 
who had been chosen by old Madame Carpi to be 
the mother of her grandchildren. 

' From this marriage were born Angelina and 
Tomaso. Tomaso was just sixteen and Angelina 
nine years of age. Their grandmother had been long 
sleeping beneath the flowery earth. 

1 So Taddeo was living with a prosperous family 
around him, placed above the chance of need by his 
official post, a happy father, an envied husband, 
when he became thus suddenly silent and restless, 
nobody knew why. Catarina, even among her 
neighbours, passed for a model of the domestic 
virtues ; little Angelina was growing every day in 
health and youthful charm ; Tomaso had given his 
parents no other cause for disquiet than a rather 
precocious maturity of character. 



 



1  

' He was a Corsican from head to foot ; and while 
his little sister was the very portrait of Taddeo, in 
Tomaso reappeared old Angelina Carpi, the dignified 
and austere grandmother. 

' One evening, on returning from the macchia 
where he had been shooting partridges, Tomaso 
stopped at the Madonna fountain to quench his 
thirst. From that spot too he could see the house 
of Giuseppe Rubbio, the father of that Giuseppa 
who is always singing like a nightingale. Tomaso 
had put aside a pair of partridges for old Rubbio, 
but the door had remained obstinately closed and 
the nightingale was not to be heard. The young 
hunter was going a little sadly to his home, when 
he noticed that people did not answer the " good- 
nights " which he threw about him as he went along. 
He felt himself the object of public insult, and his 
blood began to boil. So he went up to the first 
man who passed and said, 

1 " What is the matter ? " 

' " The inspector of taxes has come " he replied ; 
" you have been too long in the macchia" 

' " Well ? " said Tomaso. 

' " Go home," said the other ; " your mother is in 
trouble." 

' Tomaso stood motionless a moment ; he could 
not understand. Then suddenly he put his hand to 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 155 

his forehead, and the man saw that he was trembling 
all over. 

' Catarina was waiting for him on the threshold of 
the house, as white and rigid as a spectre. 

' " The Carpi family is no more ! " were her first 
words. 

' " Where is he ? " said Tomaso. 
' " Who knows ? on the highway with thieves ! " 
' " Catarina Bollini," said the young man gravely, 
" that man was certainly not my father." And paying 
no attention to his mother's pallor Tomaso went into 
the office, where the inspector, a tall fair young man, 
was verifying for the last time the collector's papers. 
' " Sir," he said, " how much is missing ? " 
' " I do not know yet, but it is a serious matter." 
' Tomaso took his gun and went out. 
' Catarina spent the night in trying to get Angelina 
to sleep, who understanding nothing of what had 
happened kept asking for father to come and kiss her. 
' The next morning at dawn the two Carpi 
re-entered the house, Tomaso following Taddeo, 
Where and how they had met, and what had passed 
between them, nobody could ever say ; anyhow the 
collector had followed his son home. 

' " Sit down there," said Tomaso, "and wait for me." 

' And Taddeo sat down by the hearth without 

raising his eyes. Angelina would have rushed to 



 



 

him, but her mother held her back. At the end of 
a quarter of an hour Tomaso came back with the 
inspector. 

'"My father had been obliged to go to Bastia," said 
the young man ; " he has brought back the money." 

' The inspector understood and bowed himself out. 

' It was Tomaso himself who had been to Bastia. 
He had assembled all the members of his family and 
had explained the whole matter to them. Rich and 
poor alike, all had contributed their share ; for the 
sense of honour is still quick in Corsica, and is all 
that is left to us of ancient times. Tomaso had come 
back with the sum required to save the honour of the 
family name, 

' " Do you wish to go and pray by your mother's 
grave?" said Tomaso, looking fixedly at his father. 

' " It is not the anniversary of her death," answered 
the collector, suddenly fancying he saw old Angelina 
Carpi reappear in his son. 

' " Then," answered Tomaso, " go up into your 
room and do the rest ; my mother and sister and I 
will stay here and pray for your soul." 

' Taddeo raised himself, shaken altogether out of 
his composure. 

' " You want me to kill myself! " 

' Tomaso contented himself with replying to this 
question solemnly, 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 157 

' " There has never been a Taddeo Carpi in our 
family." 

' The unhappy collector turned to Catarina his 
wife, but she made the sign of the cross and took her 
child in her arms as if to defend her. It was the 
supreme blow ; Taddeo made no further resistance 
and rushed into his room. None of us are cowardsj 
not even the thieves. 

1 " You may have an hour," his son cried after him 
up the stairs. And then a great silence reigned 
through the house. Catarina knelt down before the 
crucifix and repeated her rosary in a low voice. 
Tomaso, leaning against the door-post, was in deep 
meditation listening to the ticking of the clock ; the 
pitiless lad was counting the minutes. Overhead 
Taddeo was walking up and down with great strides, 
and they could hear his heavy steps on the floor. 
Suddenly a voice of despair broke the dreadful silence, 
crying, " Angelina, my little Angelina ! " 

' " Darling," said Tomaso, " go up and kiss your 
father, and then come down again quickly, Tell him 
he has twenty minutes still." 

' The little girl did not wait to be told twice ; she 
ran into the arms of Taddeo, whom she adored, and 
his sobs mingled with the child's caresses. 

1 " You have been naughty, then," she said, " that 
you have to be punished." 



 



 

' At last, when only five minutes were left, Tomaso 
called his sister down and loaded his gun. Catarina 
rose, pale as death, and looked at her son. The 
clock began to strike, and at the last stroke a body 
was heard to roll on the floor. 

' " Mother," said Tomaso, " I am the head of the 
Carpi family, honour is saved, and my grandmother 
is content." 

' The next day Taddeo's funeral took place, and 
all the family followed, with Tomaso at the head of 
it. When she was alone Catarina wept bitterly, for 
she loved her husband ; but when her son came back 
her eyes were dry, and she gave up to him the keys 
of the house.' 

This was the story the muleteer told me, and it 
moved me so deeply that I ceased to listen to the 
call of the spirits of the abyss. So one emotion 
drives out another. 

Albektacce 
Nothing particular to say about Albertacce, a 
village of about one thousand souls, and good souls 
too, for there is no inn there, and we met with the 
most generous hospitality from one of their notables, 
Dr. Albertini. He had had the honour the year 
before of receiving and lodging my celebrated confrere 
and friend, M. Guy de Maupassant, and he seemed 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 159 

very proud of his good Fortune. The pleasant 
memories which the travelling novelist left behind 
him in that Corsican family were still echoing, and 
perhaps I benefited by them during the two days we 
spent in that wild picturesque comer of the Niolo. 
The virtue of hospitality among this mountain race 
is extraordinary, and surpasses all tales that are told 
of it. These two days were a perpetual fete in which 
all the inhabitants took part. The rain kept us at 
the doctor's house, and as we occupied all the beds, 
his family were lodged with friends and relations, 
Yes, they are good souls, the thousand souls of Alber- 
tacce, and well they know how to entertain. 

This rain upset all the prince's plans, preventing 
his ascent of Monte Cinto. It was quite impossible 
for any one to think for a minute of making his 
boots into jam in the sodden earth among the slippery 
rocks, where even the mouflons themselves would 
catch bronchitis. One cannot face 8890 feet 
of liquid mud, even though one be Napoleon's 
grand-nephew ! So we were shut up at the doctor's, 
gaily awaiting the end of our troubles. During 
the fine intervals, those of us who were armed 
with rifles beat the covers in the neighbourhood, 
seeking for the Apocalyptic beast which every- 
thing in Corsica speaks of and nothing proves. 
The others were washing away at innocent watercolours. On the evening of the second day, the
father of that enthusiastic young trooper who had 
practised upon us at the inn at Santa Regina 
came to pay a visit to the chief of our expedition, 
and we had the opportunity of seeing a bandit 
close. Mercy on us 1 what an honest face he had. 
If the judges at Bastia know anything of the science 
of physiognomy, that criminal has nothing to fear. 
He has only to appear to be certain of acquittal. 

It was that evening at Albertacce, after the honest 
fellow's departure, that for the sake of diversion and 
a good laugh we amused ourselves with ' founding a 
political party ' ! 

It is a very good game at a hunting party, but it 
is not, I acknowledge, within the reach of all. First, 
you must be in the depths of Corsica, in a country 
place quite out of the world, in a rainy season ; and 
you must be there when some Boulangism or other 
stupid outburst of opinion is cracking skulls, turning 
everybody's brains, and poisoning all conversation. 
Then you must have a group of sceptics whose philo- 
sophy has an ironical basis, who have been made a 
little bitter by the absence of any perceptible mouflon, 
and are thereby divided into two camps, believers 
and non-believers in the art of governing France. 
Lastly, it is necessary that a good-humoured young 
prince, who is without the slightest ambition to 



 



La Scala di Santa Regina 161 

become a shepherd of men, should preside over the 
pleasant debates of this choice circle of exceptional 
Frenchmen, a trifle excited at dessert by the very 
generous wines of their host's cellar. And last of 
all, the presence of a poet is indispensable. Then 
you can play the game, and form by force of toasts 
and brimming cups the pleasant Orlandist party. 
That pleasant Orlandist party founded at Alber- 
tacce, which only lasted one evening, was to make 
and would have made the happiness of France. 
Unhappily, all those who composed it are so much 
occupied, some in science, some in art, and the rest 
in their own business, that it did not survive the hour 
of its enthusiastic foundation. The Fen^lonesque 
Salente which it created for the moment vanished 
with the tender mists of dawn, and went to join 
the other dreams of our wild sheep chase. Nothing 
of it remains except a song, its Marseillaise. This 
song, with which the slopes of Monte Cinto resounded, 
was an old patriotic song of 1789, which the poet of 
the caravan exhumed and resuscitated for the occasion 
out of the ashes of the past. It is worth all the 
finest volklieds and is unknown. Sung by a Theresa 
to the air of ' Cadet Roussel ' — its proper air — it 
would have been the right consecration for the 
Orlandist party. Here it is in all its simple 
grandeur. It may have for a title if it wants one — 



 



 



OUR COUNTRY IN DANGER 

Un pere avait dix-sept enfants, (bis) 
Braves, dispos et bien portants. {bis) 
V'li qu'un matin tout I'mond' s'ecrie ; 

Y'a, y'a, y'a des moments 
Ou Ton n'peut avoir trop d'enfants. 

Tout aussitfit les huit premiers [bis) 
De laboureurs se font guerriers. (bis) 
Au combat rien n'les e'pouvante ; 
Mais pourtant le peril augmente ! 

Y'a, y'a, y'a des moments 
Oil Ton n'peut avoir trop d'enfants. 

Les huit aut' frer' pre nan t 1'mousquet, (bis) 
Tout d'une voix dis'nt au cadet : (bis) 
Reste aupres du meilleur des peres : 
Nous allons r'joindre nos huit freres ! . . . 

Y'a, y'a, y'a des moments 
Oil Ton n'peut avoir trop d'enfants. 

L'per 1 qui s'voit seul ave l'cadet (bis) 
Lui dit : ' Cadet, fais ton paquet ! (bis) 
Viens la-bas fair 1 le dix-septieme, 
Moi, je ferai le dix-huhieme ! . . . ' 

Y'a, y'a, y'a des moments 
Oil Ton n'peut avoir trop d'enfants. 

C'te chanson qu'est un' verite" {bis) 
Nous ofTre un' grande morality : {bis) 
Que not re mer 1 c'est la patrie, 
Et qu' pour sauver c'te mer 1 che'rie 

Y'a, y'a, y'a des moments 
Oil faut que l'per' suiv' les enfants ! 



 



CHAPTER V 

BETWEEN CORTE AND BASTIA 

The scholar's road — Ponte Krancardo — Ponte-alla-Lcccia — The Lucchesi 
— A wotlhy grocer — Moonlight — A night attack — Morosaglia— No 
lodgings — Official intervention — Midnight — Paoli's house — Clemente 
the monk — Poor mothers ! — San Pietro d'Accia— Entrance to the 
Caslagniccia— Avenues— The chestnut. tree do«ry-Piedieroce— Con- 
vent of the Resistance — A fine ruin — Vandalism— Oreua — The hot 
springs — A local drama — Scheme for a miracle— tireen Orezza— The 
Fium' Alto — Casinca— Foleili — The rjiirm ciaji — Marshes and 
malaria — Meres — Mariana — Erudition — La Canomca -Marius and 
Sulla were Corsicans — Mere of Bigtigh.i 

The finest road from Corte to Bastia is the school- 
boy's way, that is to say, the longest, the one that 
passes by La Castagniccia, or the land of the chest- 
nut. 

On leaving the Scala di Santa Regina you rejoin 
the direct route, the teacher's way, to Ponte Francardo, 
a marshy valley where the Golo disappears, over which 



 



1  

tower great granite rocks with extraordinary outlines. 
Imagine some Gothic cathedral massive in form 
with no spires or pinnacles, of proportions suited to 
a worship of Titans, and magnified into immensity 
by the mists. It is to the sides of this antediluvian 
Notre Dame that the Muse of bridges and roads has 
suspended the railway with its tunnel and viaduct. 
Another ' work of art,' but this time one which arrests 
the artist's eye, for it is very picturesque and makes 
a good background for a picture. The learned ones 
in the caravan admire the engineering audacity of 
the bridge, and the ignorant ones sketch it 

But see what it is to linger before Cybele's 
natural churches : when some three miles farther on 
we come to Ponte-alla-Leccia, the point of departure 
for the Castagniccia route, night has fallen and the 
inns are full. 

Ponte-alla-Leccia is the only place in Corsica 
where the islanders did not keep up their character 
for hospitality. And perhaps the inns were really full, 
as the innkeepers affirmed. But anyhow, we could 
not at any price get food and lodging there. We 
should perhaps have been there still if a benevolent 
grocer, of whom we bought certain glasses of vermouth, 
had not advised us to march direct upon Morosaglia, 
which he said we should reach in two hours. ' It is the 
time when the " Lucchesi " come! ' he said, shrugging 



 



Between Corte and Bastia 165 

his shoulders ; ' and when they arrive there is such 
rioting and brawling that it is best to get away from 
the whirlwind of stones.' 

Thus did the brave Pontallaleccian bring custom to 
his inhospitable town. Everybody knows that from 
time immemorial the Corsicans brand with the name 
of ' fellows from Lucca ' the ten thousand Italians who 
come from the peninsula every autumn to undertake 
and execute the agricultural, mining, and engineering 
work, and the small commerce which is necessary for 
existence on the island. The Corsican does not 
work, he makes others work, and it is the shrewd 
Italian who profits by the incurable gentility of the 
aborigines : Italy sends them their hired serfs. 

They assemble at Ponte-alla-Leccia about the 
middle of autumn, and people come there to hire 
them for the winter season. We fell right into the 
middle of the ' Lucchesi ' fair, and there were already 
some thousands in the town. 

If, as M. Conte Grandchamps says in his excellent 
work {La Corse, sa colonisation son rble dans la 
Miditerrane'e, 1859, Paris: Hachette), Ponte-alla- 
Leccia ought, from its geographical position, to 
become a great commercial and strategic centre, 
controlling the defence and carrying trade of the 
island, and supplanting Corte, as Isola Rossa has 
dethroned Calvi, I pray Heaven (where Napoleon 



 



1  

now sits in council) to enrich our good grocer to the 
tenth generation ; for if his vermouth was good, his 
advice was even better, and we owed it to him that 
we escaped a noisy fray which, as we heard, took place 
the very evening of our prudent departure among the 
Helots of this second Greece. 

So as the shades of night fell, in spite of their 
fatigue, our intrepid little horses set out again, and a 
terrible climb began ; endless and somniferous seemed 
this road to Morosaglia ! Among the mountains 
which border it the shadows grew thicker and thicker, 
and it seemed to me, I do not know why, that our 
coachman was uneasy. He was walking with his 
whip in his hand by the side of the carriage door, and 
from time to time trying to peer anxiously into the 
darkness. 

Suddenly the moon shot up from behind a 
mountain peak like a shell from a mortar, rose silently 
into the sky and lighted up the whole scene, and 
we entered upon the inconceivable ! Peaks and crests 
of rock, saw-like edges, pointed crags, blocks of 
stone with yawning chasms, masses of spectral Alps 
appeared, like the petrified sea-waves of an extinct 
planet, all lighted up with electric brilliancy. Then 
all was eclipsed, the orb being covered. And again 
everything reappeared, the blue Rotondo, the rosy 
Spolasca, the yellow Asco, the snowy Cinto, and 



 



Between Corte and Bastia 167 

many other summits beside, bathed in a dewy, pale, 
transparent light, and the valleys looked like half- 
opened caskets of precious stones, the sharply-cut 
shadows forming the covers. What a sight ! It 
vanished ; and farther on the moon was unveiled 
again, and the inundation of liquid light rose to its 
former level, overflowing the banks of the mountains. 

The enchantment lasted for an hour — an hour 
of this masquerade, Diana Hecate's bal d'opfra, an 
hour of a gigantic game of hide and seek, waking 
the birds in their nests and scaring the bats over our 
heads ! If there is anywhere in space a sapphire 
star, such are its scenes and panoramas, and imagina- 
tion can call up no other. But the road turned and 
darkness came on. We entered a gloomy macchia, 
where the shadows were black as ebony. Our 
carriage lamp, like a moving window, alone lighted 
up the steep ascent which grew rougher and 
rougher, having no parapet and indented with 
precipices, along the edge of which we climbed 
dizzily. Suddenly the carriage was shaken, and one 
of us leaning against the back of it felt a body which 
had caught hold of it and jumped on to our baggage. 
He gave the alarm to the driver. We were going 
to be attacked, and perhaps stripped of our port- 
manteaux, as if we were a common diligence. 

' Do not move,' cried our energetic Automedon, 



 



 

a little man but strong and robust ; ' there are no 
thieves in Corsica ! ' 

And in two strides he was behind the carriage. 
We heard a brief dialogue, carried on in the Corsican 
dialect, followed by some sounding blows from the 
whip, then a scurry into the macckia, and the driver 
returned shaking his head and saying in a tone 
of ineffable contempt, 

' I told you so ! it was a Lucca fellow ! ' 
He pointed to his whip. ' That is the only 
weapon for those fellows. Skunks ! But Corsicans do 
not steal.' And he climbed back to his seat. Half 
an hour after we entered Morosaglia. It was half- 
past nine and we were dying of hunger and sleep. 

Morosaglia 

Morosaglia, which is also called Rostino, is some- 
thing like the Mecca of Corsica, for there its prophet, 
the father of his country, Pasquale Paoli, was born 
in April 1724. A vast village made up of several 
hamlets scattered about on the slopes of the hills, 
the commune extends on all sides in a chestnut 
wood ; but it is chiefly round the church in the centre, 
whose square tower dominates all like a shepherd 
leaning on his crook, that the scanty flock of its 
gray houses gathers. 



 



Between Corte and Bastia 169 

We were not badly received here — no ! we were 
not received at all, for at half-past nine Morosaglia 
is gone to bed. Its inhabitants have, it seems, 
twenty reasons for one for not opening their doors 
after sunset, and of these twenty reasons nineteen 
are excellent. From many very romantic stories 
which I listened to on the spots where the events 
occurred, I came to the conclusion that in this com- 
mune the hour of the vendetta is an hour of the 
night. Some one knocks at the door, you unbar it, 
and crack ! you find yourself with two bullets in 
your head. So from this it comes about that the 
Rostinians are early to bed. Our compassionate 
grocer had given us a letter of introduction to a 
relation of his, who habitually receives the tourists 
passing through Morosaglia. Half an hour after mid- 
night we were still in the road with the letter in our 
hands, not knowing how to get it to the person for 
whom it was destined, his house hermetically sealed 
offering us an invulnerable front. Happily the moon- 
light was magnificent that night. But our hunger, 
good heavens, and our fatigue ! 

After divers ineffectual attempts with divers 
knockers, we were going to resign ourselves to sleep 
in our carriages, when the idea occurred to one of us 
to go to the gendarmerie, and to get them to deliver 
for us this certificate of our good character which no 



 



r yo 

one would believe in because of the advanced hour. 
The gendarmerie was not at home. We found it 
in an agreeable public -house and offered it a glass. 
I ought to state publicly that it refused it, and after 
a minute inspection of our innocent persons and our 
exhausted appearance it agreed to undertake the 
introduction to mine host. We followed it, heaping 
blessings upon it. When it arrived in front of the 
austere dwelling it gave forth a peculiar whistle, called 
the host by his Christian name three times, and at 
last the door gaped ! 

It must have been quite one o'clock in the 
morning, but see what Corsican hospitality is when 
confidence is restored: in a quarter of an hour the 
whole family were not only dressed again, but in 
their Sunday clothes. All the beds were made again 
for our benefit and provided with clean sheets, and 
a perfectly fabulous supper was served us in a room 
lighted with all available candelabras. I never ate 
with such an appetite ! I never slept such a sleep ! 
And sad Morosaglia is in my memory transformed 
into an enchanted scene where even the gendarmes 
have wings. 

The hamlet in the commune in which is the 
house shown and visited as Pasquale Paoli's birth- 
place is called La Stretta. It is left in a neglected 
state by the Corsicans. But its ruinous condition 



 



Between Corte and Bastia r 7 1 

lends it an austere poetry which has a melancholy 
charm of its own. It is the house of a vanquished 
man, one of those vanquished in the cause of liberty, 
the saddest fate on earth. If I were a Corsican this 
weather-beaten ruin, which is crumbling away into 
the valley, would make me weep. For he who was 
born there desired to have his country independent, 
and it is only French ! Is that what the desolation 
of this solitary habitation is saying, and is the 
eloquent voice of inanimate things, of which philo- 
sophers tell us, to be heard here ? 

As empty inside as it is ruinous without, with not 
a book, not a piece of furniture, with nothing to 
remind one of him, just as it was when Gregorovius 
saw it in 1 852, that is, with no glass in the windows, 
Paoli's house at Morosaglia was to me like a neglected 
tomb in a cemetery. The time of ivy is the time of 
oblivion. The liberator indeed left no family. He 
did not marry, and his brother Clemente was a monk. 
The great name of Paoli is borne no more in 
Corsica. 

But is it known that a pure romantic love filled 
the heart of Pasquale without in any way diminish- 
ing the love for his country which inspired him ? 
Probably he confounded the two passions together 
and idealised them both. The Beatrice of this 
warrior Dante was a nun of a noble Corsican family, 



 



 

and she took herself a very active part in the war of 
independence. 

As for Clemente, the monk, you must go to the 
convent of Morosaglia, now the Paoli school, to find 
the traces of that man, a man as extraordinary as 
his younger brother. Clemente Paoli, the terrible 
pious soldier, reminds one of the great bishop lords 
of the Middle Ages who rushed into the mttte with 
a crucifix in one hand and a mace in the other. 
They say that every time he overthrew an enemy 
the thought of the desolation which his death would 
cause to those who loved him wrung from him a 
cry of compassion. ' Poor mother ! ' he cried, as he 
dealt the fatal blow. In the Franciscan cloister they 
showed me the cell where Clemente died in 1793, in 
the frieze frock of the third order. I came out again 
quick enough, for I fancied I could hear the lamenta- 
tions of the ' poor mothers.' It is true I am neither 
pious nor a monk. 

It was from this very convent that the general 
Pasquale Paoli directed the famous battle of Ponte 
Nuovo, in which Corsica lost her independence. 

Ponte Nuovo is not on the Castagniccia road, but 
well on along the Bastia road, the professor's. This 
village is on the banks of the Golo, in a marshy 
plain, which seems to have been in times past, and 
would be again on occasion, the usual battlefield of 



 



Between Corte and Bastia 173 

Corsica. A citadel now converted into a gendarmerie 
commands the bridge of five arches, the possession 
of which decides the fate of the three towns, Ajaccio, 
Corte, and Bastia, and consequently of the isle. It 
is at Ponte Nuovo, therefore, that the political pulse 
of Corsica beats. There is nothing more to be said 
about it. 

The poor Corsicans were beaten there on the 9th of 
May 1769 by the Comte de Vaux, who routed them, 
and from that day they date the happiness of being 
no longer Genoese. The battle of Ponte Nuovo 
made Bonaparte a Frenchman, and probably had 
Paoli not been defeated he would never have been 
Emperor of the French. He came into the world, in 
fact, on the 1 5th of August of the same year, that is, 
ninety-six days after the butchery which made him 
one of us ; alas ! for other butcheries more fearful still. 
' Poor mothers ! ' 

On leaving Morosaglia you must keep going up, 
up, to the Col di Prato, about 3195 feet above the 
level of the tunny fishes' kingdom ; and the best way, 
I think, is to climb this two miles and a half on 
foot, for the walk is delicious. 

If you have supped at one o'clock the previous 
night you arrive after this healthy walk with a fine 
appetite at the little inn of San Pietro, and you order 
an omelette of a handsome wild Corsican girl (she 



 



1  

must be a big girl now), who receives travellers with 
such an anxious smile. The omelette you seldom 
get, for butter is scarce in the island, but they give 
you instead a red partridge, the usual square of 
smoked pork, the good country wine, and the purest 
air of one of the finest spots of the world. 

From this inn you have a view of an incomparable 
panorama. The green carpet of the Bavella forest, 
the beginning of the Castagniccia, with the sea of 
Tuscany fringing it, and in the distance, in the 
watered silk sea, the historic Isle of Elba, and the 
island of romance, Monte Cristo. The mouse- 
coloured peak of San Pietro d'Accia, leprous-spotted 
with beech-trees, rises like a landmark on the borders 
of the Land of Canaan, where chestnuts take the 
place of monstrous grapes. But at the present 
moment hold tight and do not turn giddy ! Hurrah ! 
at the wildest gallop, at our very utmost speed, we 
descend by a road like a corkscrew into the country of 
the Corsican bread-tree, the celebrated Castagniccia ! 

The foliage grows thicker, the tops of the trees 
approach closer to each other and form domes over 
our heads, the light flickers through the leaves, we 
are bathed in an exquisite freshness, and the sound 
of the whispering streams and the babble of the 
waterfalls on all sides mingles with the noises of the 
forest and the soft rustle of the branches. 



 



Between Corie and Bastia 175 

The first impression that the Castagniccia gives 
you is that of a park, splendid and imperial, where 
the alleys are designed by a Le Notre, mad with ideas 
of grandeur, and hewn out with mighty strokes of a 
bill-hook in a virgin forest. There is something of 
Versailles and of Saint Cloud in this labyrinth of a 
garden full of rocks and noisy cascades ; but it is 
Versailles gone back to a wild state, and Saint Cloud 
reconquered by solitude and given back to colossal 
bindweeds and antediluvian mosses. 

It is said among geologists that La Castagniccia 
is the elysium of botany : I may add it is an 
elysium in which you can drive about in a carriage. 
Nothing can give a true idea of these chestnut-trees, 
which may justly be called historical trees, because 
for several years they supported entirely the sober 
fanatical armies of Paoli. Their massive colonnades 
border the road with green arcades, interminable 
avenues stretch away into the distance, and at the 
end of them shine out sparkling waterfalls like a 
sideboard covered with silver plate. 1 

1 This is what the social economist Blanqui says about the chestnut- 
tree in his superb report on Corsica, read before the Academy in 
October, November, and December 1838, which report is in my eyes 
the most substantial and most impartial thing that has been written 
about the island. 

'The Corsican Chestnut. 

'. . . The chestnut-tree has contributed no less to keep up the unpro- 
gressive character of the country. The people confine themselves to 



 



1  

One of us having got out of the carriage to pick 
up some chestnuts under the trees uttered such a cry 
of surprise that we ran to him in alarm. ' Come 
and see ! ' he cried. And we saw ! Inside the huge 
trunk a completely furnished room had been cut out. 
The table, two stools, a little cupboard, all were there. 
There was even a spoon and fork in the cupboard, 
and under the table a pair of sabots, 

As Corsicans sometimes give so many chestnut- 
trees to their daughters as dowry, this one would be 
a considerable portion, and we agreed unanimously 

gathering the plentiful crop it produces, and its very abundance has exerted 
tbe same social influence in this island that the potato has in Ireland. 
An ominous resemblance and yel very exact ! The inhabitants of the 
cantons where the chestnut-tree predominates are accustomed to live 
almost entirely on chestnuts. They make flour of it, which is pleasant 
and sweet when it is fresh, disagreeable and musty when it is stale. 
The tree has become their providence. They repose upon it the care of 
(heir existence, I had almost said of their children's existence. It is 
common chiefly in the middle Alpine regions, the lower parts being 
occupied by olive-trees and the upper by pines and beeches. It shelters 
the dwellings, embosoms the hamlets, and gives coolness and shade. 
It is looked upon as the storehouse of abundance for each holding. 
The origin of these great trees is lost in the darkness of the past. I 
have seen thousands of them which were considered to be more than 
Ave hundred years old. It is not uncommon (o find trees whose circum- 
ference measures more than thirty feet. In a good year one of these 
colossal vegetables will feed a man for three months. If a peasant can 
add to the produce of his chestnut-tree that of his vine and a little flock 
of sheep, he is rich and independent. He is fed and clothed. Hewitt 
not bend his back to labour ; he will henceforth leave to poor Lucca 
men the work of reclaiming the deserts of the plains and the burnt 
macikic' — La Cent, Rapport sur son itat honomiqut tt mora! en 1838, 
by M. Blanqui, Member of the Institute, Paris, 1841 : W. Coquebert. 



 



Bet-ween Corte and Bastia 1 77 

that if the girl was pretty it would be a good match 
for a mouflon hunter ! 

The first village we stopped at was Piedicroce 
d'Orezza, or rather the convent which commands it. 
It is one of the three famous convents of the 
Resistance ; the two others are the one at Morosaglia 



and the one at Alesanl The exterior of the convent 
of Piedicroce is not very interesting. It is a long 
square building of a Romanesque character, sur- 
mounted by a campanile of four storeys, without a 
spire. But the interior is a ruin of a rare and 
singular appearance, and I never saw anything in all 
my travels which made me regret so much that I was 
not at least a Pieter Neefs, if I could not be a Pieter 



 



1 78 A Wild Skeep Chase 

de Hooghe. With a proper effect of light and shade 
on this astounding confusion of chapels, altars, sculp- 
tured colonnades, headless statues, broken ornament 
and bits of carving, you would have the finest subject 
imaginable. Miss Thomasina M. A. E. Campbell in 
1868 proposed that they should make it into a hotel 
for the sick who came to drink the Orezza springs : 
they have made it into barracks for the gendarmes ! 
I am beginning to think that they carry this 
matter of the noble gendarme a little too far in 
contemporary Corsica. You see nothing else, and 
he is the foreground and chief figure in every 
picture. I should find it hard to admit, however 
Darwinian I may be, that this corps tf/lt'te could 
find no other ancient building in the district fit for 
storing its forage in than the nave of the convent 
church, nor any other stable for its horses than the 
cloisters of the said church. The day we passed 
through, the captain of the detachment was engaged 
in making his men pull down the last Romanesque 
arcades, twice venerable I may say, of the Piedicroce 
cloisters ; and when I offered him some archeological 
and sentimental remarks on the subject, he only 
replied that it must be done, and that he was author- 
ised to do it. Yet he was a very intelligent man, 
and perfectly affable, but the aggravating war that 
he wages with the bandits had quite — how shall I 



 



Between Corte and Bastia 1 79 

put it ? — decontinentalised him. I soon saw we should 
never succeed in understanding one another, that our 
skulls were not, as Mardoche says, made the same 
way. He told me the district was infested with 
bandits, and it cost me a struggle not to answer that 
I found it rather infested with gendarmes. 

Piedicroce only differs from other villages in the 
island by its cleanliness, which is quite indisputable 
and much to its advantage. In its streets you do 
not run up against those enormous black pigs, very 
amusing creatures all the same, which in the Niolo 
you are obliged to jump over to go on your way. 
The inn where we stopped is very well kept and 
satisfactorily provisioned, and we had the pleasure of 
a chat with an agreeable and educated tax collector, 
who enlivened our evening with good bandit stories ; 
among the rest one for which the Bcllacoscia (who 
are not fancied here) are responsible. An. unhappy 
cure of the canton, having been imprudent enough 
to thunder from the pulpit against these mountain 
kings, was one evening carried away by the two 
brothers and dragged from peak to peak to the 
Pintica. There he swore not to ' criticise ' them any 
more, and even to make honourable amends to them 
the next Sunday before his flock. They brought 
him back again over the peaks to his church on the 
Saturday, stayed to hear mass and the recantation 



 



 

the next day, took a little cherry brandy at the 
rectory, and decamped. ' Si non e" vero, bene trovato, 
caro mio perceptore.' 

About two miles from the village are the effer- 
vescing chalybeate springs of Orezza, famed throughout 
Europe, and justly so in my opinion. The spring is 
situated at the bottom of the valley, and you go down 
and climb up again on foot. There is not a carriage 
for the sick people. It is absurd, for here is an 
obvious site for a hydropathic institution in magni- 
ficent scenery. The waters, indeed, belong to the 
State, and the soldiers attacked with fever in Tonquin 
are sent there. Those who are most reduced by the 
fever are on their legs again in a fortnight, for the 
restorative virtue of the spring is almost miraculous. 
I drank a glass of it from the discoloured basin of 
the establishment, and a sensation of Youth came 
over me. immediately. It was Orezza water that 
Mephistopheles gave to Faust. 

The sick world would come here from all parts 
of the universe to renew and revivify its blood, if only 
there was some possible access to the enchanted 
fountain, and if they could obtain lodgings in the 
neighbourhood. But the apathy of those interested 
in the matter is only equalled by the fatalism of the 
inhabitants. ' People would have to cross the sea,' 
they say resignedly ; and they are contented with 



( 



Between Corte and Bastia 1 8 1 

drinking themselves as much as they can swallow 
of this life-giving water at three halfpence the quart, 
and it makes them live to a hundred, and fills them 
with strength and gaiety. 

Besides, there is a little communal drama going 
on in the pieve about which people are greatly 
excited, not without reason it seems to me. The 
government spring is not the only one by a great 
many which issues from the mountains in the land 
of chestnuts. There are others in great numbers, 
with the same healing virtues, oozing and bubbling 
up in lands which are private property, the owners of 
which would grow rich if they were turned to profit. 
These men consider themselves injured because the 
State spring alone has the right to • label its bottles 
with the name of Orezza water. As there is no 
village of the name of Orezza, Orezza being a 
Corsican province, they claim the right of advertising 
their springs under this general name and competing 
with the government. 

I am not a lawyer — for which i thank God every 
day— but I would have found them an infallible way of 
circumventing the government, which richly deserves it 
for its humdrum neglect of its spring. Nothing makes 
the fortune of a spring like a miracle. 'Get hold of 
one for your own private springs/ I said, ' and you 
will have a run upon you after the model of Lourdes, 



 



r 

which is the perfect thing of its kind.' They 
thought I was joking. They were wrong. The 
miracle once accomplished and properly advertised, 
the State would be putting in its finger and the 
Republic claiming to be ' in it.' 

I have mentioned already my visit to the cutler 
of Piedipartino* a neighbouring hamlet, and how I 
bought a real Corsican stiletto from him. This 
honest artist must have been pleased with the price I 
paid him for his artistic weapon, and still more I 
think with the compliments I made him about it, for 
having heard me regret that I must leave without 
seeing the ' green Orezza,' a famous marble which 
Charles Gamier has used in the New Opera House, 
and whole columns of which are to be seen in the 
Villa Medici, he offered to get us some. 
. ' Come ! ' he said, taking up a hammer. 

A quarter of an hour farther on along the road, 
he stopped before some blocks of stone lying 
abandoned by the corner of a bridge, and broke 
off some pieces after repeated blows. ' See,' he said ; 
' this is it ! ' 

And it was. There is nothing more choice than 
this pretty gray granite with spots like pistacchio nuts, 
which is now the glory of my mineralogical collection ; 
and to think that you can find it in superabundance 
lying in the roads, and have nothing to do but take 



 



Between Corte and Bastia 183 

it ! What a house, my Charles Gamier, one might 
have — a house of emerald and malachite! If ever 
I am rich ! 

It was when returning from Piedipartino, laden 
with our first stones, that we passed through a village < 
where the cure was not saying mass. The poor 
villagers in their Sunday clothes, with their books in 
their hands, were assembled round the church, gloomy 
and disconsolate, in the most profound silence. The 
bell for service had not rung. The doors were shut. 
What had happened ? Oh, nothing ! Only the 
gendarmes had come that morning and arrested the 
cure in his bed on the charge of being inculpated 
in — a vendetta. Perhaps it was the collector's cure! 
O Corsica !' 

If you are going to rejoin at Folelli the great high 
road which runs along all the eastern side of the 
island and connects Bonifacio and Bastia, you come 
down from the Castagniccia along the Fium' Alto 
by a road so beautiful and so abominably bad that 
you do not know whether to attribute to admiration 
or to anguish the cries which travellers give vent to. 
Now as this via dolorosa is the very one by which 
the sick must flock to the Orezza spring, one can 
understand that doctors often hesitate to send them 
thither. They can only arrive there in a disem- 
bodied state, if they arrive at all. You would risk 



 



 

your life less by going down to Folelli by the bed of 
the torrent itself than by the ' carriage road,' as the 
guide-books call it, which runs along the side. We 
rolled down for some fourteen miles parallel with a 
.croaking river which seemed in a sinister manner to 
be foretelling all the accidents that one dreams of, 
and Regulus's cask was as easy as tobogganing com- 
pared to what we suffered in our loins, our sides, our 
heads, our knees, all over, in fact, in the best hung 
carriage in all Corsica. 

But what a dramatic and superb piece of country 
this Casinca is, and what a fine Phlegethon this Fium' 
Alto makes ! If ever I go back to Corsica I mean 
to go and see these wild gorges again, abounding in 
spots fit for heroic scenes, where a historical painter 
would find a hundred ideas for a ' Bringing Order 
out of Chaos ' ; — only I will go on foot. 

Folelli is nothing but an inn, but it is an excellent 
inn, where one breakfasts as one ought to breakfast. 
I suppose one can dine as well, but time failed us to 
make sure of this fact, and so did the attraction of 
the landscape which becomes rather vague at this 
point. In fact, at Folelli you leave the black Corsica, 
the uncivilised Corsica, whose wild Fium' Alto makes 
a last supreme picturesque appeal to you, and you 
enter upon flat marshy Italian Corsica. 

We are now on the eastern coast, about which 



( 



Between Corte and Bastia 185 

people have written so much that there is really 
nothing new to say about it : an enormous plain of 
585 square miles saturated with water, scorched by 
the sun, a place where malaria reigns, and which the 
islanders themselves cross at full gallop holding their 
handkerchiefs to their mouths. It is the realm of fever. 

This Pontine marsh is so unhealthy that, even 
according to a Corsican author, a white linen cloth 
left out in the evening exposed to the air is found 
the next morning red with mildew. 

Pestilent ulcerous pools formed by the discharge 
of the torrent estuaries stagnate on these coasts of 
the island, and contribute to create belief in the legends 
which represent it as uninhabitable. The meres of 
Urbino, Diana, and del' Sale, and the mere of Biguglia, 
which we are just about to pass, are, after sunset, 
nothing but hotbeds of marsh pestilence. The 
purifying mistral never blows over them. And what 
solitude ! It seems that it would be easy to win 
back from death this immense tongue of Corsican 
land, and to turn its fertilising putrefaction to profit 
for agricultural purposes. Nature herself points out 
the remedy by the luxuriant vegetation with which 
she covers the slime. The smallest plants here affect 
tropical dimensions ; the grass is of incredible vigour 
and thickness. It is the flora of the colonies. 

In some places which have been already carelessly 



 



 

cultivated they get four crops of lucerne. In others 
the corn grows as rank as that of Egypt. The 
eucalyptus succeeds everywhere : it flourishes and 
makes a forest in three years. The mud brought 
down by the Golo and the Tavignano is truly nuggets 
of gold, and the Romans had found it out, for they 
had certainly two mercantile stations here in this 
storehouse of inexhaustible abundance, Aleria and 
Mariana. They understood that all they had to do 
was to build dykes and make channels for the furious 
torrents caused by the melting of the snow and the 
spring inundations. Would it be so difficult to take up 
again their salutary works, and to follow the plan of 
them as it can be discovered from the ruins that 
are left ? 

' We must not deceive ourselves,' Blanqui said as 
early as 1838 ; 'the question of making the marshes 
healthy is a question of life or death for Corsica, it is a 
matter binding on the whole community. The island 
reduced to its own resources is not in a position to 
accomplish so hard a task : we owe it our aid and pro- 
tection as much as if it were suffering from some huge 
conflagration ' (La Corse, Rapport). 

The comparison to a fire is energetic and fine. It 
was the kind of thing to strike a government, if a 
government can be struck by anything. 

Several governments have succeeded one another 



 



Between Corle and Bastia 187 

since that eloquent appeal, and the marshes are in 
the same state as in 1838, or very nearly so. With 
all due respect to the illustrious social economist, or 
at least to his memory, nothing but private enterprise 
will effect the draining of these fetid marshes or any- 
thing else of the kind, and the Corsicans have no 
enterprise. They live and die with their eyes fixed 
on the government. 

If the isle were English, as poor Paoli desperately 
hoped it might become, the eastern coast would have 
been turned into a healthy region, with canals dug, 
and roads made, and the country planted — in fact it 
would have become a Mitidja for John Bull. It 
would produce dates, and the stagnant pool of Diana 
would afford shelter to ships of great tonnage, and 
have a pretty seaside town round it. 

At the heights of Cervione, the class of tourists 
who are suffering from having recently taken their 
degree generally turn to the right and go towards 
the sea, to visit the ruins of Mariana, a Roman city 
founded by Marius, of which there remains — the site. 
They come back with some flowers of Latin speech 
on their lips, and feeling a little taken in. As the 
day before they have in the same manner made a 
pilgrimage to the ruins of Aleria, another Roman 
colony founded by Sulla, of which there remains 
only — the memory, they begin on their return to 



 



1  

draw fine parallels between the two founders, and 
their conversation becomes quite instructive. 

Our friend the mouflon slayer does not give 
himself so much trouble to compete with F^nelon 
and Montesquieu in these literary exercises. He 
roundly declares that in his opinion Marius and 
Sulla were Corsicans. And when we all timidly cry 
out against this frightful heresy and its revolting 
partiality, ' Their story proves it ! ' he declares. 
' Their story is nothing but a long Roman ven- 
detta. I defy you to deny it ! Read Livy ! ' 

And we are silenced, for he is right. The 
enmity between Marius and Sulla did something 
for Corsica. It created Aleria and Mariana. 

Mariana, however, did not leave us quite un- 
impressed because of the very pretty church which 
it possesses and which they call La Canonica. It 
is one of the most precious pieces of art in Corsica. 
I am not a sufficiently good architect to describe it 
technically to you, but La Canonica appeared to me 
to date from the eleventh century and to belong 
to the Byzantine style. It has a triple nave with 
Doric columns, but the chapels are Gothic certainly, 
and the facade, adorned with niches and gryphons, 
is of the Pisa school. There ! I will say no more, 
and for the best reason. 

The mere of Biguglia is the largest of these 



 



Between. Corte and Basiia 189 

unhealthy swamps. It is about five miles from the 
entrance to Bastia, to which place it serves as fish- 
pond. Probably from the time of the Roman 
colonisation its exquisite fish appeared on the tables 
of those connoisseurs of whom Juvenal speaks in his 
fifth satire — 

Mulus erit domino quern misit Corsica. 
At the present day it is the people of Bastia who 
eat these fine-flavoured Corsican mullet. And when 
they fail their place is taken by a pdti of wild duck 
shot in the reeds and rushes of the swamp. 



 



CHAPTER VI 



General aspect*- Harbour quarter — The Place Saint Nicolas— The 
Emperor with the large feet — The theatre— A reverie— Albert Glatigny 
—The harbour— The museum— The Hotel de France— M. Staffe— 
Cardinal Fesch's collection — A sketch interrupted — The tall 
hat — Cafe Andreani — Louis Caparja — The navigable balloon — 
Tortonism. 

If you did not know beforehand that Corsica was 
once Genoese, you would guess it on seeing Bastia. 

Bastia is Genoa in miniature. The same situation 
on the sea coast, the same surroundings, the same 
port, the same streets, and the whole character of 
the town the same. There is nothing wanting but 
the splendid insolent palaces of the Via Garibaldi 



 



Bastia 191 

and the symbolical lions crouching on the steps of 
the porticoes. ' 

These palaces are replaced on La Traverse, the 
principal street of the town, and still more in the 
Place Saint Nicolas, by large modern houses of the 
Haussman type, without art or style, unless you call 
this kind of architecture the style of Napoleon III. ! 
The most absolute regularity prevails, and there 
is an entire absence of colour. Only round the 
harbour, the part about the quays which says its 
prayers in the church of St. John the Baptist, is 
amusing to walk about in. There is a cheerful 
sound of trampling on the marble slabs which 
pave the footpaths, and under certain Roman gate- 
ways stalls of fruit, fish, and vegetables catch the 
light pleasantly. It is there I should live if I had 
to live in Bastia. I should certainly choose my 
domicile close by the chestnut market, where there 
are such curious bronze gryphons, and which is 
enlivened by the chatter of the gossips round the 
fountain. The historical odour of the old Corsican 
town is only to be detected there, at least by ethno- 
graphical noses. 

As for the terribly majestic Place Saint Nicolas 
where, thunderstruck, you contemplate the statue of 
Napoleon of which I have already spoken, I do not 
want to bring upon myself a Bastia vendetta, but 



 



 

goodness gracious, what a Place it is, and what a 
statue ! It is true that if it were not so large, 
Napoleon's feet would stick out beyond the pedestal 
into the sea ! If posterity trusts to the worthy 
sculptor's conception, and refers to it as authentic, 
just as Charlemagne is called ' the Emperor with 
the snowy beard,' so Napoleon will be called ' the 
Emperor with the large feet.' These feet might 
well hold the whole bridge of Areola. In fact, I 
have seen better academic proportions, I give you 
my word of honour ! 

As for the Place itself, a certain wind, the libeccio, 
blows there, so that you might think yourself in 
Avignon. How the little wooden theatre which 
adorns it, a mere shapeless hut, stands against it, 
is more than I can understand. It must be ballasted 
with tragedies. This barn brought back to my 
mind the melancholy recollection of the poor poet 
Albert Glatigny who played Scribe there. Glatigny 
was prompter and actor of third-rate parts to a 
travelling company, and it was while going from 
Bastia to Ajaccio that he was taken for Jud, and 
imprisoned at Bocognano. 

Why should I not tell how I sat down on a 
bench before this strollers' booth, stranded there like 
driftwood, and with my back to the chiropodist's 
Napoleon took to dreaming over the hard times and 



 



Bastia 193 

the gay companions of my literary apprenticeship? 
The illusion was so strong that as I sat in this Place 
Saint Nicolas I seemed for a moment to hear and 
recognise Glatigny's voice within, declaiming the 
dolorous prose. 

Have you ever tried to remember the sound of 
the voices of your friends who are dead ? The 
memory of a voice — there is nothing more impossible 
to bring back. The expression, the face itself, the 
gait, the familiar gesture, these things leave an 
impression upon you ; but the voice ? And add to 
this that there are not two voices alike. If phonetics 
is a science, it is the vaguest and most uncertain of 
all. Perhaps a time may come when, thanks to 
Edison's discoveries, it may be possible to preserve 
in metal plates the sound of our loved ones' voices. 
And it will indeed be the sweetest of all miracles, 
for the voice alone gives one an impression of a real 
presence. A painted or carved portrait gives but 
the illusion of it. When the voice is fixed, to forget 
will be impossible. The most lonely will die sur- 
rounded by his people's voices. 

You will remember the mirth-provoking adven- 
ture of the poet who was taken for Jud by the 
Corsican gendarmes, and thrown upon damp straw. 
Have you read the story of the adventure given in 
' the little book published by Lemerre entitled Le Jour 



 



 

de fau d*un vagabond? All Paris died of laughing 
at it. Between ourselves, I always thought the story 
was a huge joke, invented by that sardonic Glatigny, 
who had something of Bache in him and excelled in 
fierce attacks. 

I had met Glatigny at the first representation 
of Theodore de Banville's La Pomme. We had 
exchanged, in Coquelin's box, our ideas on the 
pitiless severity of the million in the matter of 
rhymes ; and as Banville inspired me, as well as 
him, with an enthusiasm of which nothing has ever 
been able to cure me, an artistic liaison was formed 
between us and ratified with a few half-pints. Then 
Glatigny went off into the provinces, the profession 
of strolling player, by which he earned his living, 
carrying him there. You know that among the 
various parts that he created, the one of which he 
was most justly proud was that of the passer-by 
who throws a couple of halfpence to Patachon in 
the Deux Aveugles, and who crosses the stage 
without saying a word. Nobody has ever succeeded 
him in that scene. He realised the very ideal of a 
passer-by throwing pence to a blind man, and it 
was as strikingly natural as it was profoundly 
studied. 

He shone too, and with great /da/, in the 
repertory of Scribe, his personal enemy and bile noire. 



 



Bastia 195 

' I play him to make people hate him,' he said to 
me one day ; ' and to make people hate him I have 
nothing to do but to make him known ! ' 

Glatigny, indeed, had a peculiar manner of in- 
terpreting Scribe and his colonels. All of a sudden, 
without any warning, he would begin to translate 
his part into verse, and publicly put into rhyme the 
fearful prose of his detested author. Thence came 
the astonishment which was aroused at places like 
Bastia and Carcassone. At other times he would 
unexpectedly replace the text by an ode of Victor 
Hugo's, for example, with such a result as the absurd 
anomaly of Oscar, the husband who deceives his wife, 
declaiming with amusing irrelevance the Manteau 
Imperial from the Ch&timents. When the prefect 
of the department was in the house the effect was 
certain. But Glatigny could not repeat the thing 
more than once in the same town. 

I had lost sight of the poet for some years when, 
during a journey I was making in the south, I met 
him again in a curious manner. The train from 
Marseilles to Nice was creeping along the Mediter- 
ranean coast, when at the Cannes station a tall 
fellow, as lean as a rake, very ragged, and wearing his 
rags with pride, entered my compartment. He was 
smoking an exquisite pipe, and leading a little bull- 
terrier to which he began to talk dog in the most 



 



 

tender fashion. I recognised that diabolical bark, 
and the immortal Cosette was familiar to me. How- 
ever, as Glatigny had not recognised me (no doubt 
the Corsican prisons had left a cloud on his memory), 
I did not move from my corner and waited for a 
tunnel, for one of those interminable tunnels of the 
Esterel which seem as if they were the Cyclopean 
caves of the old Ligurian giants. Then in the 
darkness, pretending to be talking to a man who 
was rather deaf, I shouted : 

' Yes, sir, it is as I have the honour to tell you, 
Victor Hugo has rallied to the Empire. He arrived 
the day before yesterday from Guernsey and has been 
received at the Tuileries. The Empress has shown 
herself as amiable as possible to the poet, and he 
made but one stipulation on being reconciled, but one, 
and that was that Theodore de Banville should be 
nominated to the prefecture of Ille-et-Vilaine. For 
a long time M. de Banville has been begging humbly 
for this post. Yes, sir ' 

Glatigny was beating the devil's tattoo on the 
glass of the windows, and growling like a lion who is 
being teased. I went on : 

'Victor Hugo also has paid Theophile Gautier 
great compliments for joining with Scribe and 
Legouv6, and this in Marshal Bazaine's presence, who 
offered Gautier a Mexican pomade which would make 



 



Baslia 1 97 

his hair grow again, for the celebrated critic is bald 
as you know. Yes, sir ■ 

' Bite him ! ' roared Glatigny to Cosette ; ' bite 
him !' 

' I forgot to say,' I added, ' that at the same time 
Glatigny was making his debut at the Comedie Fran- 
chise in the travesties ' 

' Wretch ! who are you ? ' And good Glatigny 
in the darkness sprang at my throat. 

'Find out, Jud!' I said, without attempting to 
defend myself. 

1 1 know your voice. Yes, I know your voice. 
Speak, or I will kill you, like a simple Poinsot.' 

' How has Cosette been since the first night of La 
Pomme?' 

'It is you?' said Glatigny, recognising me, 'I 
had my suspicions. And what are you doing in these 
parts ? Here's a meeting. I am going to Nice to 
improvise at Madame Ratazzi's. I have an engage- 
ment, but I have not a coat. Have you a coat ? ' 

I had a coat. I was possessed of this coat through 
the munificence of a Bercy wine merchant's son to 
whom I was giving {at kis fatJier's request .') lessons 
in French prosody. But this coat was in my box, 
and the box was in the luggage van. So Glatigny 
was forced to go on with me to Mentone, the place 
towards which I was directing my steps, as the 



 



 

best authors say. He told me then the story of his 
misadventures as Ragotin in Corsica, and also of 
his ' triumphs ' in this very Bastia theatre now 
at this moment before my eyes, and where his 
declamatory voice, consumptive and hollow like a 
ventriloquist's, seems to be echoing still. 

But let us come back to the harbour. It is a 
creek rather than a harbour, and the entrance is so 
narrow that it must be very difficult to get in. When 
the above-mentioned libeccio is driving the ship, I 
should imagine, without knowing a vast deal about the 
matter, that the ship would thread its way through 
the passage with about the same ease as you would 
thread a moving needle, If the captain aims wrong, 
he must begin all over again. 

They are, in fact, beginning to make another more 
practicable harbour for the people of Bastia, who are 
the most amiable people in the world and merit 
every attention. The strategical position of Bastia, 
first of all, is strong and important, as it commands 
the sea of Tuscany ; then, on the other hand, all the 
commerce of the island passes through the place. 

I do not think, however, that for a long time 
picture dealing has found Bastia an important centre 
of operations ; they do not love painters there, living or 
dead. I proved this twice, as I will tell you directly. 

Chance, which is sometimes the best of c 



 



Bastia 199 

would have us choose from among several hotels, 
equally excellent, the Hdtel de France, which is — be 
it spoken with reverence — the ' republican ' hotel of 
the town. As we had at the head of our expedition 
a Prince of the Bonaparte family, this choice annoyed 
the rival establishments and caused some scandal 
among the politicians. 

Heaven knows, however, that the choice was quite 
involuntary, and not one of us was aware that there 
could be any manifestation of opinion, progressive or 
reactionary, in taking up our lodgings right or left of 
the street of La Traverse. But in Corsica they do 
not make a joke of these trifles. Between ourselves, 
they would do better to attend to their business. 
Great Endians or Small Endians, the best Endian is 
he who has the best egg in his egg-cup. Now the eggs 
of the Hdtel de France were eggs of the first order. 
And besides, this was what really decided us for it. 

' When you arrive in Bastia,' a traveller of 
experience had said, ' do not quit your carriage, but 
go on looking right and left at the doors which pass 
before you. When you see on the threshold of one 
of them a man with a tall hat, and dressed in 
the evening costume commonly called swallow-tails, 
stop and enter by that door. That is the right one. 
There they give you lampreys from the pools of 
Biguglia ! ' 



 



 

And the traveller of experience had added, ' You 
cannot make a mistake. That tall hat and the 
swallow-tail coat are the only ones in Corsica ! ' 

Faithful to our directions, therefore, we cried 
' Stop ! ' to our driver as soon as we perceived literally 
the ' silken ' sign which answered to the description, 
and this was how we became the guests of worthy 
M. Staffe. 

Worthy M. Staffe, who alas ! is just dead, was 
one of the curiosities of Bastia. He represented there 
for thirty years Paris and continental taste. He was 
the Corsican in a black coat ! Never did he quit 
that symbolic garment, and he never covered his 
head with anything but the sublime gibus which is 
ironed and made like new for fifty centimes. It is 
unnecessary to add, of course, that he believed in 
nothing but a white cravat, and that to the last day 
of his life he wore varnished boots. 

He was a tall, thin, brisk old man, clean-shaven, to 
whom absolute correctness was life itself ; he passed 
the whole day sitting on a chair in the street before 
his door, waiting for travellers. Rich, a man of 
importance and influence, popular, and a member of 
the Municipal Council, he did not disdain to wait 
at table himself upon any guests of quality that 
Providence sent him, and when the meal was over 
he would sit down with them at the table, and send 



 



Bastia 20 1 

for his choice liqueurs and cigars and talk to them 
— of Paris ! 

He was one of those for whom Paris is the 
centre of the earth. He would sigh as he pronounced 
the word ' boulevard.' I never met a mortal who 
believed more sincerely in the pleasures of the town. 
If it is true that he has really left a world in which 
there is such a divine thing as the Folies-Bergere, 
may the fine democratic uniform he wore here be 
received in the other world as an extenuating circum- 
stance. He would have no need to plead extenuating 
circumstances if the good management of his Hotel 
de France were taken into account, the cleanness of 
the rooms, the softness of the beds, the riches of the 
cellars, the comfort and politeness, and that celestial 
dish of murenes de la Biguglia aux eclialotes. All 
his virtues taken together merit a glorious assumption 
into Paradise, white cravat and all ! 

I said they had little love for painting and even 
for painters in Bastia, and I promised to give two 
proofs of it. The first is the really scandalous con- ' 
dition in which the pictures bequeathed to the town 
by Cardinal Fesch are left, at the Hotel de Ville, by 
the municipality. I declare I came out of the place 
in a fury after my visit there in October 1887. 

Not that the pictures are all good — certainly not ; 



 



 

there are some even that are execrable. But literally 
to leave to rot on the walls a collection which as a 
whole constitutes a fund of information about Italian 
painting of the second rank, this forces imprecations 
from the calmest man. It is worse here even than 
at Corte : I saw in the police station a dozen pieces 
of still life riddled with holes- by the sabres of the 
sergents dt vilte. 

In the hall of the mazrie there is a very fine 
Carracci crumbling to dust, and I recognised as I 
went along two or three pieces by that Aniello who 
was Salvator Rosa's master and the Michael Angelo 
of battle pieces. There are certainly others of equal 
interest, for Cardinal Fesch did not collect mere 
rubbish. It would at least be decent to employ an 
expert to classify them and put a little order into 
this disgraceful litter, which is unworthy of a French 
town with any respect for itself. 

I had indeed been, as you may say, prepared to be 
stupefied with indignation at the Bastia ' Museum ' 
by a significant occurrence which happened that very 
morning. Desiring to make use of the clear luminous 
weather to obtain some souvenir of the town, or, to 
put it simply, a water-colour sketch, I had gone 
with M. Escard and established myself at the end of 
the pier with all my amateur's apparatus. From 
that point, indeed, the view is charming and forms a 



 



Bastia 203 

good picture. The ' maschio,' or square keep of the 
old citadel with its high red ochre walls, below the 
green of the public gardens and terraced walks, a 
pretty house by the water, the varying blues of the 
deep waters of the harbour, the violet mountains in 
the distance, in the foreground a little sloop coloured 
a slaty blue — altogether it was a subject calling for a 
painter, and for a cleverer one than your humble 
servant. 

I had not been seated on my camp-stool for ten 
minutes when the pier-keeper, a man belonging to the 
douane, came up to us, and this conversation began : 

(Ill-temperedly) 'What are you doing there?' 

' You can see — painting.' 

' Who are you ? ' 

' I belong to the painters apparently.' 

' Where is your certificate?' (Silence.) ' If you 
are a painter you ought to have a certificate. Show it,' 

' There are painters and painters ! * interrupted M. 
Escard. 

' What does your thing represent ? ' 

1 Well,' I explained, reddening, ' the keep, the 
fortifications and the garden, at least as well as I can 
do it ; I do not charge much for them ! ' 

1 Hum ! ' said the douanier. 

And I saw clearly the suspicion of a Prussian spy 
rising up in his eyes. 



 



 

' Here we are ! ' I said to M. Escard. ' We are 
going to be stoned ! ' 

The pier man executed rapidly a violent gesture. 
' You will remain there and wait for me. I shall be 
back in five minutes,' 

And he ran to the Marina. The urchins of the 
harbour were already gathering about us, excited and 
suspicious, and a threatening murmur began to spread 
along the quays. 

' Quick 1 ' I said to Escard, ' go and fetch help. 
This stupid bogie of a Prussian spy is all-powerful 
with the masses, and the danger is all the greater 
because it is so stupid.' 

I went on with my sketch to keep myself in 
countenance, and even pretended to light a pipe, but 
I was not without uneasiness. The harbour was in 
a regular hubbub. The douanter came back with other 
douaniers, followed by a considerable crowd. They 
demanded my papers. I gave my portfolio, and at 
their orders I was going to tie up my things and 
follow them, when a tall hat ending in a distinguished 
swallow-tail appeared, scattered the curious crowd 
and rescued me. It was the excellent M. Staffe 
fetched by M. Escard. He knew Paris, he — the 
worthy hotel-keeper — knew all about it. He went 
bail for us and carried us off. That was the state 
of things at Bastia in 1 887 ! 



 



Bastia, 205 

In the evening I went to the Cafe Andreani to 
get news of the Odeon, and as the continental 
newspapers gave me excellent accounts at once, I 
did not know what else to do with myself. I 
was settling myself, therefore, to go to sleep, when 
my eye fell on a customer who had been plunged 
in the comparative study of L 'Illustration and Le 
Monde illustr/, and who had suddenly raised his 
head. Now this head was a strange one truly. 
Balanced on a frail body, for which it seemed too 
heavy, and which looked as if it had been destined 
from all eternity for another, this head was a perfectly 
confounding resuscitation of the young Bonaparte's, 
but a Hoffmanesque Bonaparte jaundiced and curly. 
This curious personage seemed to me to be about 
five and twenty, or rather, as Seneca says, that he 
would never see five and twenty again. 

He soon rose, took his hat and stick, and went 
towards the door. All the habitues of the cafe 
saluted him as he passed, and the waiters showed 
him out with respectful solicitude. Doubtless I had 
just seen one of the great persons of the island which, 
according to Jean Jacques's famous prophecy, has 
not yet done 'astounding the world.' 

' Who is it ? ' I asked. 

And they answered, ' The discoverer of the secret 
of the navigable balloon.' 



( 



 

I listened no more. The charm was broken. 
To tell a boulevardier of the boulevards that a gentle- 
man, even though he be a Corsican and so like Bona- 
parte that he might have deceived Madame Mere 
herself, has solved the problem of aerial navigation, 
is to forget that the boulevardier is a Frenchman, and 
that a Frenchman is an incorrigible sceptic upon 
whom it is useless to practise. We all know, from 
the Grand H6tel to the Rue Drouot, all about the 
navigable balloon. You go up an aeronaut, and you 
come down a photographer ! The proper use of the 
balloon is to be captive, for if you let it go it is the 
very devil and flies off with you. And I took down 
my overcoat from its peg. A waiter came to help 
me put it on as usual. 

' Ah, sir,' he said in my ear with a strong local 
accent ; ' ah ! if we could only have him also 1 ' 

' Who, that ? what also ? ' and I looked at him 
with my mouth open, one arm in the air. 

1 Dame, sir ! after Napoleon and Christopher 
Columbus — for Christopher Columbus was a Corsican, 
science has proved that now. And you under- 
stand ? ' 

Not only I did not understand, I would not 
understand. 

1 You understand, if it were for us also to give 
to the world the empire of the air ! ah, then ! ' 



 



Bastia 207 

He stopped, snapping his fingers. There was 
nothing for me to do but to get to bed as fast as 
possible : Bastia in the evening was dangerous, and 
they say it is catching. 

The next day I paid a visit to some notables 
of the town, grave persons, sober, and men of 
importance, from whom, as a conscientious historio- 
grapher, I made inquiry first respecting the 
curiosities of Bastia, and then about the men 
eminent either in science or art that this little 
Genoa could show, 

' It can show M. Louis Capazza,' answered these 
austere grandees with a sincere and unanimous pride. 
And I blushed as I was bound to do, for my ' Tor- 
tonism ' was caught in a flagrant piece of ignorance. 
I knew nothing of this Louis Capazza, and my 
Larousse was not at hand, alas ! 

' Ah, indeed ? ' I said with a smile. 

' It was at Bastia,' said one of my hosts, ' that he 
discovered the campylograph.' 

' And his two ellipsographs,' added another. 

' And his admirable " parachute-leste," ' continued 
a third, a member of the Municipal Council. 

My embarrassment became too visible, for really 
I have taken my degree, and I was afraid they 
would doubt it. I have never been so tortured by 
this ' Tortonism,' useful enough in Paris, but so inconvenient elsewhere, the philosophical wallet and
lugg a ge of a boulevardier. 

The podesta continued : ' Need I tell you — I beg 
your pardon, remind you — that the parachute-leste 
has now been officially adopted by the Commission 
of French military aerostation ? M. Louis Capazza 
could sell it easily to Russia, to Italy, and even— 
you understand. But he is a patriot ; he has given 
it to France, and for nothing, ad oculum, as Tully 
says, and yet he is not rich.' 

' Ah, if he only were ! ' 

' Or if we Corsicans were ! If we were, we 
Corsicans, or if he were, he would long since have 
constructed and launched his lenticular balloon, which 
is nothing less, sir, than a navigable balloon in embryo, 
and it would be from Bastia that this discovery would 
take its rise, which, as you know, would change the 
habits of the whole planet.' 

' Yes,' I said, ' lenticular ! ' and excusing myself on 
the pretext of a pressing engagement, I made a rapid 
escape. 

Our sojourn at this little Genoa began to be slightly 
oppressive, and the fear of being introduced sooner or 
later to this yellow and curly young Bonaparte made 
me give up the pleasure, which was also a duty, of 
going to the Cafe" Andreani for news of the Odeon. 

But one cannot escape from one's fate, even if one 



 



Bastia 209 

is a most decided ' Tortonist ' in matters of scientific 
discovery, and the very prophet of the statu quo in 
one's own country. Eight days after, near the Gulf of 
Porto, on the western coast, I was washing in a water- 
colour sketch (so called) under the direction of my 
indulgent friend the painter, Marius Michel, a distin- 
guished oleographer whom I had just met. My feeble 
genius was struggling uselessly, I ought to say, with 
the winged fancies of a flock of magnificent sea-birds, 
whiter than the spotless garment of the poles, whose 
flight seemed to me, as well as to him, not only 
impossible to catch, but impossible to understand, 
even for graduates. Sometimes undulating to and 
fro, sometimes motionless, always careless of the 
breeze — which was pretty strong, however — and 
unaffected by it, these happy sea-gulls cut the waves 
of azure horizontally, rowing in the peaceful fashion 
of galleys on the Mer du Roy, and disturbing all the 
received notions — our notions, O Tortoni ! — on the 
flight of birds. When they wanted to rise, without 
checking their impetus they threw themselves lightly 
back, with their wings spread, displaying the downy 
prows of their pretty silky breasts ; that was all, and 
up they went. When they wanted to come down, 
without checking their impetus they leant gently 
forward, with their wings spread, exposing the oily 
poop of their superb silver backs ; that was all, and 



 



2io 

down they came. If they desired to drop, they 
closed their wings, and plump, down they dropped. 

' Observe,' chuckled a voice behind us, ' none of 
them try to rise perpendicularly in a straight line 
like the Montgolfiers (1783-1890)! That is why 
they move in space,' 

Alarmed, I felt that the fatal meeting with 
its dreaded introduction was imminent. The HofT- 
manesque Bonaparte of the Cafe Andreani was 
hovering over my Tortonist back : I dared not turn 
round. But already the voice sounded farther off, 
saying, ' The ellipsoid of a bird in motion is the 
lens.' Then it was lost among the olive-trees talking 
still, ' The navigable balloon, therefore, will be len- 
ticular, or it will never be at all.' 

' Poor fellow ! ' said my friend the painter, ' what a 
fate is that of an inventor in France ! His idea of 
the lenticular form is the only new essay that aero- 
statics has made since Montgolfier's time, the only 
step forward that that hovering science has risked, 
the only effort to escape from the routine in which 
we are bound ! He cannot succeed in making people 
listen to him. All doors are closed to him — 
academic, governmental, independent, and of course 
financial doors : there is only Corsica who believes 
in him. And yet who knows ? I always think of 
Fulton when I meet him, and of that everlasting 



tzsdbyGQOgle 



Bastta 2 1 1 

stupidity on the part of our country which prevented 
us from taking the initiative, with all its advantages, 
in the discovery of steam ! You will see we shall let 
aerial navigation pass under our very noses ! If only 
they would try it ! If only they would risk some- 
thing in experiments ! For you see these unhappy 
aeronauts are not gasconading. It is their skin they 
are playing pitch and toss with. One does not play 
practical jokes with the atmosphere. This young 
Corsican upon whom you turned your back, and who 
discreetly went away for fear of bothering you, he 
is as brave as he is timid. He has made five and 
twenty ascents, at the age of five and twenty, alone 
or almost alone, in a horrible balloon that I saw at 
Marseilles, which was a mere rag. He was the first 
to dare to cross the sea, on this rag of a thing, on 
14th November 1886, and to succeed. For he did 
succeed. He had as his companion that colossus 
Fondere, now an explorer in Central Africa, whose 
daring is proverbial, and who yet takes off his hat 
when any one mentions in his presence the name of 
little Capazza, a child whom he could pick up with 
one arm. And yet ! Well, France is France, and the 
boulevard is the boulevard ! ' 



 




CHAPTER VII 



THE NORTH COAST : FROM BASTIA TO CALVI 



i the north coast — Cape Corso — A meditation at Luri — Seneca and 
exile— The Col di Teghime — Barbaggio — San Fiorenzo— The ■ zerri ' 
— Isola Rossa— The monolith of Algajola— For sale— Algajola— A 
town of ruins — A lament — Lumio — A cathedral sheepfold — Calvi — 
M. Capifali— An Arab— The citadel— The street del Filo— Chris- 
topher Columbus— The Abbe Peretti— Catenzana— Prince Pierre's 
fountain — A tomb. 



I should tell a lie indeed if I said that 1 had paid 
a pleasant visit to Cape Corso. I did not visit it at all. 
At the last moment it was scratched off our itinerary, 
for the season was advanced, and the mouflon was 
flying before us towards Calvi on the north coast. 
He may perhaps have stopped for a moment in that 
marvellous citron grove which forms Cape Corso, 
and we might have caught him in that fortunate 



 



The North Coast: from Bastia to Calvi 213 

peninsula, either in the depths of the shining grottoes 
of Brando, or at Sisco under the olive-trees, or at 
Pino, where dwell the millionaires M. Cagninacce and 
M. Liccioni, or in one of the eighty-five Genoese 
towers which defend the indentations of the shore. 
But Vincent Bonnaud consoled us by assuring us 
that' the mouflon never came to Cape Corso. ' It is 
too cultivated for his taste,' he said. 

Nevertheless, without giving him any warning, but 
merely profiting by a day when it had been agreed we 
should rest thoroughly, each one after his own fashion, 
before starting again, 1 had myself taken in a boat to the 
creek nearest to Luri to see the famous tower of Seneca. 

I had a matter to settle with that philosopher, 
a private mouflon of my own, for we have each our 
own wild sheep, have we not ? 

In the middle of Cape Corso there is a little town 
called Luri where they show an old tower in which 
the exiled Seneca lived for nine years. Certainly 
Seneca was a very pretty rascal, and Diderot, in spite 
of all his genius, has not succeeded in rehabilitating the 
memory of Nero's queer preceptor, of whom, as you 
will remember, worthy Tacitus has some strong things 
to say. Yet at Luri the traveller, face to face with 
the tower, is moved with pity. Some English botanists 
even weep over it. Poor Seneca ! (2-66 A.D.) Un- 
fortunate philosopher I To have lived for nine years 



 



 

in the admirable scenery of Cape Corso without the 
last news from Rome ! That Emperor Claudius must 
have been a wicked man indeed. Ah, 1 can tell 
you the Emperor Claudius is not beloved at Luri ! 

I hardly dare tell you that even at Luri, in front 
of this tower, which moreover is Genoese, Seneca's 
exile left me shamefully unmoved. But I also am 
a philosopher. I read my Guide Joanne again, and 
watched the botanists weeping, but I could not curse 
the Emperor Claudius, and the thought would keep 
coming that Seneca was a lucky man to have to live 
at Luri. What would he have said if the Emperor 
Claudius had exiled him to Batignolles ? 

I am evidently wrong, and it arises perhaps from 
my not being able, although I am a philosopher, to 
form a very clear idea of what people nowadays call 
the ' sorrows of exile.' They exist, that is certain, 
especially when you are describing them upon your 
return, and drinking toasts to liberty. It is a recog- 
nised matter that proscribed people have suffered, 
even when they had with them in exile all those 
they loved, and were able to live there as elsewhere 
by their work and their talents. The pangs of exile 
are indubitable. The whole human race esteem it 
one of the severest tortures that can be inflicted on 
man. It has created a class of literature which is to 
be found in all languages, sometimes without music, 



 



The North Coast ; from Bastia to Calvi 2 1 5 

but oftener with. I hope I am not wounding any- 
body by reminding graduates of my year that the 
subject of exile is the one most frequently set for 
Latin verse. It produces every year its ten or twelve 
university masterpieces. It is one of the common- 
places of western mandarinism. Let any one who 
has not paraphrased the exclamation of Scipio 
Africanus, ' Ungrateful country, thou shalt not have 
my bones,' and made the Gradus groan over that 
great man's deportation, hold up his hand. 

It is to be presumed that nature created me 
a nomad, a tourist and a Touranian ; for even at 
college this fine theme of ' exile ' left my rhetoric 
helpless. I could not find a hexameter for Scipio's 
bones, and even now I should not know what to say 
to you about them, except that these noble bones 
are very well wherever they are, if indeed they are 
anywhere. My excuse is that I am not sensitive to 
the pain of exile. At Luri I envied Seneca, and 
across the ages I argued thus with him : ' Suppose, 
my dear master, that you had been born at Luri, and 
that they wanted to exile you ; they would send you 
to Rome, as they send us moderns to Brussels or 
Geneva. Then one of two things must have happened : 
either you would have been enchanted at being con- 
fined in the capital, or you would have been broken- 
hearted about it. In the second case, you would be 



 



 

regretting Luri your native city (and there you are !), 
and in the first you would be disowning, with small 
filial affection, the said city. But history tells us you 
saw the light at Cordova, about which you never 
breathe a word in all your grief. Now all these 
towns are part of the Roman Empire, and even of the 
inhabited earth. If I am not mistaken you are a 
man. Then where is the exile ? Does it consist in 
not being able to enjoy your free tickets to the 
Folies-Bergere of your time ? I dare not suggest 
it, it is so very probable. For I can scarcely see 
anything but that that is really painful in what is 
still called among boulevardiers " the sufferings of 
proscription." ' 

Is it a paradox to advance the statement that, 
leaving patriotism on one side and speaking philo- 
sophically, these pains of exile are always in direct 
ratio with the ideas that people hold about decen- 
tralisation ? For a man who holds that life is not 
possible except at Paris exile begins at Courbevoie, 
which is in France, and like Ovid he finds the 
Scythians at Vaugirard even, which is in Paris all 
the same. I go farther still : I hold that for a 
passionate advocate of centralisation, whose model 
representative is the boulevardier, Senlis is farther 
off than Brussels ! Which of us would not rather be 
exiled to Geneva than to Dourdan, where, however, 



( 



The North Coast ; from Bastia to Calvi 2 1 7 

our great national critic was born? Indeed, take 
Francisque Sarcey himself, and having proscribed 
him for his critiques, generously give him the choice 
between residing eternally in London and staying 
endlessly at Dourdan his native place. He will 
choose London ! Yet he does not know English. 
Then what do you understand by exile ? 

I ask again what is exile at a time when, and on an 
egg-shaped globe where, Sarah Bernhardt, Coquelin, 
and the very Comedie Francaise itself, carry about 
from town to town the dilapidated treasure of our 
dramatic art ; when our painters send off their articles 
de Paris to America, without even having exhibited 
them before they go ; when Saint - Saens, Reyer, 
and Massanet will go and conduct their operas them- 
selves wherever any one likes to call them ; when 
our glorious dressmakers, our illustrious modistes, our 
immortal bootmakers, have branches in the most 
insignificant towns of 10,000 people. With the 
telephone in existence, is one in exile at Brussels ? 
Are not our patriotic journals to be had there, as 
well as .our letters, two hours earlier than at Neuilly 
sur Seine, and do not telegrams (O prodigy !) reach 
their destinations there ? What is a place of exile 
to which you can go in six hours, and return the 
same day in six hours more — that is twelve hours in 
an express train — in time to see the sun set and a 



 



 

ministry fall ? Will you call Brussels a place of 
exile from France, when all Paris is going to be 
there at the first night of Sigurd ? 

Let us dare to say boldly, exile exists no longer 
in modern Europe, and Scipio would have no diffi- 
culty in finding a place for his bones. Proscription 
in the scale of penalties is a less serious matter than 
a cell in a police station, t should prefer it to a fine 
of a hundred francs. It is a miserable scarecrow 
which. governments make use of to force the French, 
who are so stay-at-home and hard to move, to go about 
a little and see the world and decentralise themselves. 
A simple removal into the country for the summer 
is a more important order for Messrs. Bailly than a 
remove into exile, and they make you pay for the latter 
in advance, before packing you up, for more security, 
because proscribed men are recalled so soon nowadays, 
and come and go without being domiciled anywhere. 

I am evidently not made like the rest of the 
world, and I feel that though I am sincere people 
will think me odd ; but every time I hear that 
France has just exiled one of her children and driven 
him into the wide world, I think of Victor Hugo's 
girls who, when they were angry with their canaries, 
threatened to ' shut them out ' ! To be shut out, 
that is what exile is, and forbidden to bear the name 
of Pietro. The punishment is not one that would stop 



 



The North Coast ; from Bastia to Calvi 2 1 9 

me on the slippery slope of crime. I do not say the 
same about Mazas.for example, our democratic Bastille. 
Mazas, broumm ! But Brussels, and wings, wings ! 

I adore Paris indeed, especially in spring, for 
it is then the most charming town in the world. 
As Seneca saw the light at Cordova, and Sarcey at 
Dourdan, I received that bitter gift of life in a street 
near the Pont Neuf. But if ever I deserve, like 
those philosophers, my masters, to be banished from 
the Ville-Lumiere, they have only to send me to 
Venice or Constantinople and I shall go without any 
tears. And if to aggravate my penance they make 
it heavier by adding a mission or a consulate, I shall 
bear the additional torture as others do, and at the 
same price. For you have the right — the law is 
clear on this subject — to take with you your family, 
your dog, your cat, your books, paper and pens, and 
your flute if you play it, and that is everything. 
The only thing wanting are your ancestor's ashes 
inurned ; probably in a few years cremation will give 
you the power of adding this sentimental piece of 
luggage. As for your gods, they are never wanting 
anywhere, either wood or ivory. Wherever one 
loves and is loved, there one is at home. During 
the whole time of the Empire the French Muses 
resided in Guernsey, an English island, and those 
who saw Victor Hugo during the last years of his 



 



 

life remember the emotion with which he spoke of 
his dear Hauteville House. 



The road which connects Bastia and Calvi is from 
its beginning very fine. You do it on foot, first because 
it rises for over six miles, and then because the most 
delicious flowers of various kinds, full of fragrance, 
border the road as far as the Col di Teghime. 

This first part of the way is so like the Corniche 
that you might make a mistake and fancy yourself 
between Eza and Eeaulieu, for example. The same 
trees, the same flora, the same cultivation of the vine 
and of almond-trees, the same gardens of espaliers 
and the same charm. From the Col the view 
extends over a double panorama, and you have the 
sea on your right and on your left. To the east, 
Bastia and the mere of Biguglia, the islands and the 
Tuscan sea ; to the west, the slopes of the hills, the 
Nebbio, the Gulf of San Fiorenzo, and below the 
green Balagna, that Corsican Touraine. You might 
climb ever so much higher, you would see no more, 
and yet you are only at a height of 1775 feet, my 
dear Prince, that is to say only a few strides for you, 
above the eternal level of the waters. 

It would be useless for me, following so many 
other travellers, to give a learned description of 
a scene so well known and so well deserving its 



 



The North Coast : from Bastia to Calvi 221 

celebrity 1 Wherever there is a harmony of moun- 
tain and sea in a landscape, one has a sensation of 
grandeur, and one groans because one is not a bird 
instead of a plantigrade animal. At the Col di 
Teghime I longed to launch forth into space and 
swim to Calvi by stroke of arm. The carriage took 
me up just in time, and carried us with loose rein 
down into a vast vine-growing country where the 
vintage was going on. The place is called Barbaggio. 

Beautiful brunettes, with velvet eyes, were carry- 
ing on their heads great square baskets full of purple 
grapes, going barefoot along the paths. At our 
request they gave us some bunches, so big that half 
a mile farther on we had not done eating them. 

We crossed a river bordered with oleanders like 
the Eurotas, and we were once more in a marsh. In 
this marsh crouches the pretty town of San Fiorenzo, 
which Napoleon thought of making into another 
Toulon. If he had really wished to realise this 
project he must first, I suppose, have drained the 
alluvial marsh formed by the waters of the Aliso, 
made channels for the inundations, and rendered the 
place habitable. As for the Gulf of San Fiorenzo, it 
is indeed admirable, and the roadstead which would be 
constructed here would not have an equal in the world. 

1 This Gulf might contain an army ! ' cried Bellin 
the engineer in 1769. 



 



 

As for the town itself, there is nothing to say 
about it interesting, except, perhaps, to the medical 
faculty. People must die there like flies. Eight 
hundred malarious inhabitants carry on their avoca- 
tions somehow, and if they care for healthy children 
ought to regret every birth. 

Miss Thomasina M. A. E. Campbell pretends 
that she ate at San Fiorenzo some ' zerri,' a famous 
fish, she says, which I have never heard of, even in 
the island. Of Corsican fish I am acquainted with 
the ' becasse de mer,' the ' regina,' the ' scorpio,' the 
1 prete,' the ' coq de mer,' the ' mureno,' and the 
' bianchetti ' ; but the ' zerri,' what is it ? * 



Isola Rossa 

The whole of this northern coast of the island has 
an inexpressible charm. It gives you the sensation 
of an eastern land, but one rousing itself a little, 
not much, like a bird pluming itself in the sun and 
stretching a wing as it stands at the end of a rock. 

Here we are at Isola Rossa. Isola Rossa, which 

1 In this place, and also in Chapter III., M. Bergerat quotes several 
passages from a Narrative of Lord Byron's Voyage to Corsica and 
Sardinia, during tkt Summer and Autumn of iSzr, published in 1824. 
As the book is considered to be a fabrication, and is so marked in the 
Catalogue of the British Museum, it has been thought best to omit 
these quotations. — Te. 



 



The North Coast: from Bastia to Calvi 223 

is so named from two little red islands forming part of 
the harbour, where people used to shoot partridges a 
hundred years ago, is a modern town, constructed by 
Paoli to worry Calvi and divert from her the com- 
merce of the Balagna. Calvi, in fact, had remained 



faithful to Genoa, and the general's patriotism could 
not tolerate this fidelity, which he considered as 
defection from the common cause of independence. 
To punish it he ruined Calvi ; that is to say, he 
raised her up a rival. Isola Rossa has not been in 
existence a century, and it is certainly the most 
active and lively port on this coast ; it is the most 



 



224 -*4 Wild Sheep Chase 

original besides. This man Paoli certainly had a 
firm grip ! — and taste too. As for its picturesqueness, 
we may sum up pretty exactly the three characteristics 
of the improvised town. Here it is Venice ; there is 
a Louis XVI. market ; and again, a delicious bay after 
the fashion of the little Ligurian creeks. If we add 
a promenade in a country town ornamented by a 
fountain surmounted by a bust of the man who 
created Isola Rossa, the portrait would be complete 
in four touches. I hasten to add that the inhabitants 
are charming people, pleasant and obliging, and that 
the H6tel Degiovanni, where we stopped, is kept in the 
most superior style by an excellent lady, a clever and 
energetic cook, who carries on herself, armed with a 
spit, the hereditary struggle against the Genoese city. 
It is at Isola Rossa that you should stay if you 
come to pass a winter in Corsica : everything is 
abundant there ; everything is good, and the fishing 
is miraculous. For crab-eaters and lobster -lovers 
especially, Isola Rossa is a very paradise. She sends 
boats full of them every Monday to Nice, her opposite 
neighbour, who may be seen smiling at her in the 
sea mirror. These boats take passengers also. 
About two or three miles from Isola Rossa, and 
before you arrive at Algajola, you generally make 
your driver stop at a place on the road where is to 
be found one of the curiosities of the isle of Corsica, 



 



The North Coast : from Bastia to Calvi 225 

the monolith of Algajola. It is an enormous column 
of granite, lying still where it was dug up, which has 
been left there for more than half a century, because 
they could not transport it any farther. The sea is 
only some 200 feet away, however, and it seems 
as if an engineer (some of them are so clever) had 
only to push it down on to a raft. The expense, no 
doubt, would be considerable ; but the block which 
forms the base of the Venddme column is colossal 
too, and came from the same quarry. Yet it arrived 
in Paris. The shaft truly is formidable ; it measures 
62 feet 4 inches in length, by 9 feet 10 inches in 
diameter. Set up, it would be imposing and undis- 
memberable, it would ! What it is doing there in 
the grass, nobody knows. What was its first destina- 
tion, nobody can tell. It is considered certain that 
it was the first idea of the column which makes one 
proud of being a Frenchman when one looks at it. 
I looked my very best at it therefore, but the proud 
feeling did not come. On the contrary, I felt as if 
I should be more proud of being an American, for 
example, in front of this neglected object, for the 
Americans would not leave such a specimen for half 
an hour in the state in which the French leave it, and 
they would soon push it on to a raft. Besides, it is 
for sale. Who will have this little paper-weight ? 



 



 



Algajola 

Isola Rossa forms an extraordinary contrast to 
the ruins of Algajola, its Genoese feudal neighbour. 

Algajola, that little dead city, whose battlementcd 
ramparts have been crumbling away into the oily 
Mediterranean for four hundred years 1 where the 
houses with yawning rents, apparently irreparable, 
stand in line with, or sideways to, or at an angle 
with, roads heaped with rubbish fit for a nation of 
lizards ! Algajola, whose walls have more holes 
through which you can see the sky than there 
are stars at night to pierce that sky, and which 
seems to be always posing to some Isabey as a 
picturesque model of a town taken by assault, bom- 
barded, burnt, and sacked in the middle ages. This 
Algajola was my own personal discovery in Corsica : 

1 have the whole credit of it, and claim all the honour. 

If I could entice half a dozen painters to go there, 
they would have enough to do for ten years in working 
out the artistic suggestions of the place, and all the 
different scenes that might be developed from it. 
These ruins are an enchantment for an artist's eye. 
Style, character, form, and colour, all are here, and 
nature seems to have even invented a special vegeta- 
tion to heighten the effect. I saw there strange 



 



The North Coast : from Bastia to Calvi 227 

grasses, hanging blossoms, unknown lichens and pelli- 
tories, which defy the botanist and his herbaria. But 
still more do they defy the painter and his brushes 
by variety of tone, by their harmony, the surprising 
silhouettes, and the play of light and shade. 

I abused our photographer M. Philippon's patience 
and his talents shamefully at Algajola, and made 
him take views as long as the sun would permit during 
one entire day, until he had exhausted all his plates. 
We should be there still if somebody had not inter- 
fered, and I only ask to go back again. 

I even, as a precaution, assured myself that it 
was possible to live there in spite of the extreme 
penury of its poor inhabitants (167), who dispute 
their heaps of rubbish with the birds and rats. For 
there are only 167 people left in that once rich and 
powerful town, the fortifications of which prove its 
past greatness. You could live there, indeed, very 
comfortably, and we had a charming breakfast there, 
provided by a worthy woman who keeps a little inn 
in the principal street. She pillaged her stores for 
the winter for our benefit. I much regret that I have 
forgotten her name ; but if a settlement of painters 
should ever establish themselves at Algajola, I 
promise her I will get her their custom. She cooks 
marvellously, and she knows some fine songs, and that 
is saying everything. 



 



 

This is one she sang to us — a doleful rhythm like 
an Arab song: — 

LAMENTO DEL L'ALGAJOLA 

O gran Dio, una grazia ti chiedo ! 
Vorrci forza per farmi sen tire ; 
La mia bella £ andata a dormire ; 
Lei vorrei questa sera parlare. 



O gran Nume dei fonti 
Apri, schiudi la chiusa fenesii 
La mia bella ma presto si ves 



O gran Nume, una grazia ti chiedo 
Vorrei forza per farmi sentire ; 
■ La mia bella e andata a dormire ; 
Lei sa tutto che voglio narrare. 



Era avezza di andare alia 
Accompagnata dei i 
Si avidano i miei genitori, 
Monicella me fecano fare. 



Monicella me fecano tare, 
E son richiusa fra. i sette cancelli ; 
E mi tagliano i biondi capelli. 
i, piangete per me. 



Giovinetti, piangete, piangete ! 
Ore perdu t a la bella Ernella, 
Una giovana cosi vaga e bella 



 



The North Coast: from Bastia to Calvi 229 



Vorrei fare d'un cor risoluto, 
Mentre tutti restano a dormire. 
Io di qui ne voglio sortire, 
Voglio andare con mio prim' am 



Giovinetti, piangete, piangete I 
Che mi tagliano i longhi capelli, 
Ricciolini si biondi et si belli ! 
Giovinetti, piangete per me. 



THE ALGAJOLA LAMENT 

great God, one favour I beg ! 

1 would have strength to make myself heard ; 
My beloved is gone to sleep ; 

I would speak with her this night. 



O great Divinity of the fountains of love, 
Open, undo the closed window. 
Let my beloved dress in haste 
And come to listen to my song. 



great Divinity, one favour I beg ! 

1 would have strength to make myself heard. 
My beloved is gone to sleep ; 

She knows all that I wish to tell her. 



I was accustomed to go ti 
Attended by my lovers ; 
My parents became aware 
They made me become a 



 



 

They made me become a nun. 
And seven bars have shut me in ; 
And they have cut off my fair hair. 
Youths, weep for me I 

Youths, weep, weep and mourn 1 
I have lost the beautiful Ernella, 
A maiden so sweet and fair ; 
She is shut in by convent walls. 

I would act with a resolute heart, 
While all the world is sleeping. 
From this place I would depart; 
I would go with my first love. 

Youths, weep, weep and mourn ! 
They cut off my long hair, 
My ringlets so bright and so fair. 
Youths, weep for me. 

This strange complaint, with its startling naYvete, 
is set to such dolorous music, that in the middle of 
that disused necropolis, where every moment a piece 
of wall becomes detached and comes rattling down, 
it filled us with a huge melancholy. We must sup- 
pose, moreover, that the misfortunes of the lovely 
Ernella are popular in Balagna, for I heard them 
sung again at Lozzi-Peo by a young girl from 
Calenzana, who put into her song an expression of 
fervour which was the more affecting that she did 
not seem to understand exactly the nunnery trouble 
which she expressed so innocently. 



 



The North Coast : from Bastia to Calvi 231 

Calvi 

Between Algajola and Calvi there is an im- 
portant village named Lumio, the situation of which 
is superb, and which would also be a joy to painters. 
Its shining white houses rise one above another on a 
hill side, and above them stands an old dismantled 
keep flanked by towers. Orange gardens powder it 
with gold, and all the pathways that lead to it dis- 
play an Oriental glory of cactuses, agaves, and Bar- 
bary figs along their borders. These exotic plants 
are of enormous size here. 

Lumio is a place for the Corsican nobility, the 
summer resort of the aristocracy of Calvi. It has 
nearly 1 000 inhabitants. 

I shall not be content till I have attracted to this 
marvellous country the colony of artists that I keep 
on calling for. But I should like a Troyon or a 
Charles Jacque for the monumental sheepfold which 
is seen below Lumio in a field by the sea. 

This sheepfold, which might shelter 1200 sheep, 
is a kind of cloister with porticoes, whose deep galleries 
store up shade of every quality, and a chiaroscuro 
which would make the master of Amsterdam turn 
pale. What a background for an animal painter ! 
This Lumio sheepfold is the sheep's cathedral ! 
They must dream about it while they are grazing ! 



 



 

Calvi. This is an adorable little town, sleeping 
on its white promontory, which the sea surrounds 
with a constant rustle of blue silk. 

This fortress, haughty and coquettish at the same 
time, iridescent in the sunlight, when seen at a dis- 
tance between the two mirrors, sky and water, looks 
like a sweetmeat on a silver dish. You would say it 
was transparent. What magician inhabits the citadel 
of glass, or what fairy makes this mirage of a crystal 
castle rise before the tourist's enchanted gaze ? But 
no ! the sun moves on and nothing disappears. Little 
trotting Corsican horses rattle you across some bridges 
over streams, and here you are in the capital of rich 
Balagna. Calvi is not a dream, but it will always 
remain one to me. Happy are those who live in the 
country where they would like to have been born ! 
Theophile Gautier's melancholy saying is very true, 
' One is not always born in one's true native land.' 
I ought to have been born in Calvi, like Christopher 
Columbus. 

I felt this from the beginning, from the very first 
contact, that is to say at the sight of the first Arab 
whom we passed near an old isolated church, a 
hundred yards from the town. Arabs in Corsica ! 
This might appear surprising. But no! they harmon- 
ise perfectly with the landscape, for the town is so 
Algerian itself; and if one is astonished at anything, 



 



The North Coast : from Bastia to Calvi 233 

it is at not seeing minarets, palm-trees, and camels. 
In spite of the dismalness of confinement, the Arabs 
of the Calvi house of correction ought not to be very 
unhappy ; they have at least the illusion of being in 
their own land. 

As the town was en file, dressed with flags and 
garlands for some holiday of the neighbourhood, we 
entered under arches of triumph, and went without 
stopping to our hosts, the family Capifali. 

The head of the family, the engineer Capifali, is a 
considerable person in La Balagna, and has put his 
name to the finest works of art that the department 
of roads and bridges has executed in Corsica for forty 
years. His venerable sister, Madame Maret, was the 
aunt of my confrere, M. Henri Maret. She died a 
few days after our visit, and I was the last man from 
the continent who could speak to her of her nephew's 
talents and of the universal respect in which he is 
held. Her eyes grew moist as I spoke, and that 
pleasant echo from the great city, I hope, helped to 
comfort her last hours. 

One day after dinner, — and what a dinner ! one 
of those in which Marie, their cook, the cordon bleu of' 
Corsica, had surpassed herself, and attained the very 
highest point of her art — we asked to see one of 
the Arabs of the town. They are allowed to ramble 
about at liberty, and are received by the inhabitants. 



 



 

People had spoken to us of this one as an admirable 
man, of exceptional intelligence, a poet, and speaking 
French with facility. Our curiosity was awakened, 
especially as they represented him to us as innocent, 
or nearly so, of the crime for which he had been 
interned at Calvi fifteen years before. 

Ah ! what kind people the members of this 
Corsican family must be, and what would they do 
for their relatives and old friends, if they treat 
simple visitors and passers-by in such a manner. 
It is true that young Prince Roland was expected. 
The memories left behind at Calvi by his father have 
remained very lively, and the faithful town is faithful 
to him in everything. 

M. Capifali served the Arab up to us at dessert. 
He was indeed a being of incomparable beauty, still 
young, about five-and-thirty, with noble movements 
beneath his white burnous with its long folds, and 
with eyes like a gazelle's augmenting the charm of 
his voice, which was like a child's, rhythmical, singing, 
delicious. 

We made him talk. He quite carried us away . 
* by his tales, his reflections, his metaphors, and the 
sweet persuasive inflections of that voice of enchanting 
tone. We were convinced immediately, and would 
all of us have sworn to his angelic innocence and to 
the evident injustice of his detention. We resolved 



 



The North Coast : from Bastia to Calvi 235 

to get him his pardon, to the great joy of Madame 
Maret, who was quite touched by the unhappy man's 
story. 

The Prince telegraphed to the Minister of War 
for information. Alas, poor hunters ! what a wild 
sheep this one was. The Arab with antelope eyes 
was an abominable rogue, stained with crime from 
head to foot, who had murdered his father and mother, 
a robber on the highway, who was only waiting his 
opportunity to escape and preach a holy war against 
France. Such was the Minister's answer. It cured 
us for some time of the sin of compassion. 

Then, during one of the good days we passed 
in that magic town, our hosts took us up to the 
citadel. Between the towers of the old Genoese keep, 
in an open p&ti, as it were, all the mystery of an 
ancient city is enclosed. Through a labyrinth of 
steep ascents, little streets, stairs, and vaulted passages, 
you come to a circular terrace, planted with thick 
plane trees, from which you can see all the indented 
outline of the coast as far as Cape Corso. What a 
view it is ! The harbour is some thousand feet below, 
with its flotilla of nutshells and paper boats floating 
gently in it, and to the right La Balagna spreads out 
an emerald carpet worked in gold. It does one 
good to lean one's elbows on the wall and fill one's 
soul with joy, one's lungs with the breeze, one's eyes 



 



 

with the brightly-coloured view, and let the hours 
flow, drop by drop, out of Time's tilted urn. 

But after poetry, erudition has its claims, and we 
turn to the interior of the p&ti. Our guides stop 
us in a little street, much like those in Algajola. 
They show us a ruin. It is rather, if I may express 
myself so, the ruin of a ruin ; for in fact nothing 
remains of what they see there but a confused heap 
of rubbish and plaster without any apparent archi- 
tectural form. 

' You are in the Via del Filo,' these good people 
said with emotion, the most hospitable people of a 
town which is the head-quarters of Corsican hospi- 
tality. The Via del Filo ? I raised my head inter- 
rogatively, but my learned companion interfered 
quickly to save us from the ill effect of my ignorance, 
for he has his Corsica at his fingers' ends, as a grand- 
son of Lucien Bonaparte ought to have. 

' And is this all that remains of the house in 
which he was born?' he asked our kind cicerones, 
indicating the heap of immemorial ruins. 

' Where who was born ? ' I insisted foolishly. 

' Why, Christopher Columbus 1 ' said the Prince 
with a smile. 

Now, without being a well of knowledge, I am 
not, on the other hand, the fervent agnostic that every 
man has a right to be in these times of historical 



 



The North Coast : from Bastia to Calvi 237 

doubt and general cheapening of tradition. • At 
Charlemagne, where I was at school, I remember it 
was the favourite dodge and the thing to do among 
the young rascals to answer the question, ' Where 
was Christopher Columbus born ? ' by the follow- 
ing little jest : ' Christopher Columbus was born 
in a state very near la gine (boredom),' la gfrie 
being taken for the Italian town (Genoa) where all 
historians up to the present have agreed to give 
birth to this great man. But to come to Corsica 
to learn that the great Admiral of the Seas was born 
in the Via del Filo, Calvi, was a surprise which was 
not in the plan of the journey. 

'But then,' I said, 'Christopher Columbus would 
be a Frenchman.' 

' He is,' a young priest, who had just joined us, 
answered severely. ' This house is his birthplace ; 
I have all the proofs. Follow me.' 

It was equivalent to renouncing one's degree ; 
but we followed him, and he showed us his proofs. 
They appeared to me, as to Prince Roland, indisput- 
able ; Christopher Columbus was a native of Calvi. 1 

' I had forgotten this adventure, and even, I confess, the Alibi! 
Peretti, the ardent preacher of this historical restitution, [and once again 
in the stream of life, was much more preoccupied with Forel than with 
Christopher Columbus, when, only a few days ago, I received from 
Bastia a pretty voluminous packet, which, directly I touched it, I con- 
cluded was a book. And so it was. If I had forgotten the Abbe 
Peretti he had remembered me, and he sent me his proofs duly printed 



 



 

If you are some days at Calvi it is absolutely 
indispensable for you to make a detour a little to 
the south to visit the town of Calenzana, one of the 
most considerable in the island. Calenzana is the 
great market for oil and honey. It has now a gay 
industrious population of over 3000 souls. And it 
will increase, for Calenzana is the place for Corsican 
beauties. You can easily foretell its growth from 
the quantity of children crawling about its steep 
flowery streets. I never saw so many little rogues, 
except at Cancale, an equally prolific town, where 
Cupid never unbends his bow. At Calenzana he 
never loses an arrow. The town prides itself on 
rather a dim historical event, the defeat of the German 

with the commission lo popularise them in the Parisian press. It seems 
I had engaged to launch the true theory of the nationality of the (lis. 
coverer of America. It is very possible ; I was in such high spirits at 
Calvi ! So I read the book, and I do not hesitate to fulfil my promise. 
If, in these days of besotted Boulangism, any one would like to forget 
the present by drinking of the Lethe of historical research, let him take 
up the Abbe Peretli's work. I know none which is more curious for 
the mathematical precision of its deductions. Nobody could be bom 
anywhere with more imposing authorities. The Via del Filo is made. 
I defy Italy to celebrate the anniversary of Christopher Columbus, not 
merely at Genoa, but no matter where, even ' in a state near ' it, if M. 
Crispi will give himself the trouble simply to look through the book, or 
to have it read to King Humbert, for he at least is an honest man. If 
Christopher Columbus was not born at Calvi, he was bom nowhere, 
and that is not possible. I am quite aware that Calvi was then a 
Genoese possession, but as the republic of Genoa acknowledged the 
French protectorate, or, to put it belter, the suzerainty of Louis XL, 
it is a necessary consequence that be is the fellow-countryman of 
Napoleon, Porel, and Boulanger, by anticipation indeed, but still their 



 



The North Coast : front Bastia to Calvi 239 

mercenaries of Genoa by Ceccaldi, one of its children. 
It happened in 1732, under Charles VI., and the 
history is not very familiar to us ; scarcely any of 
us, except the Prince, could talk about it with the 
Calenzanese without making mistakes. It is true he 
ought to know all about it, his father, Prince Pierre, 
having lived long in the place. He is even con- 
sidered their benefactor, because of the public fountain 
he presented to the town. Water in Corsica is a 
priceless gift, and one is often reminded here of how 
this subject occupied the thoughts of the people of 
Hellas, who would give up a Theocritus for a fountain. 
The spring rendered serviceable by Prince Pierre 
Bonaparte has made the good Calenzanese rich, 

fellow-countryman. He was a lucky man, this Christopher Columbus, 
and I envy him for being born at Calvi ; only if this happiness had 
fallen to my lot I should never have quitted my native place, the 
diamond town sparkling between two sapphires. One ought to have 
the right lo choose one's own country ; it would simplify not only many 
historical questions, but also political and social questions which weigh 
heavily on mankind. Yes, at one-and- twenty, when a man conies of 
age, and is in possession of his strength and judgment, knows himself, 
and is properly instructed in history, legend, tradition, and the exact 
sciences, he should choose a certain nation and devote himself lo 
it, to the state of progress which il represents, to the amount of liberty 
which it allows, to the code which governs it, and to the race which it 
is perpetuating. I do not think we should lose by this arrangement in 
France, and that is why I risk the proposition. And then no such 
problems could present themselves to the frightful sagacity of the Abbe 
Perelti as that of Christopher Columbus, a great man if ever there was 
one, but who never said whether he was a Corsican, a Genoese, an 
Italian, a Frenchman, or a Spaniard, and has provokingly left only one 
thing certain about him, that he was a man. 



 



 

neither more nor less. They know it, they still 
acknowledge it, and our leader could satisfy himself 
thoroughly, by the enthusiasm which surrounded him 
during his visit, of the importance of this idyllic gift. 
The fountain was festooned with flowers and adorned 
as if it were a shrine, and he had to drink a glass of 
the water to the prosperity of La Balagna, 

Our host at Calenzana was M. Bonacorsi. He 
claimed the right of entertaining us on account of 
the friendship which had bound him to the benefactor 
of the place, ' a man,' he told us, ' who had killed 
mouflons, and as many as you like.' There are 
mouflons, then ? 

M. Bonacorsi is, as his name indicates, a passion- 
ate lover of his country ; he loves Corsica as one 
loves one's beloved mother. He would like her to 
be rich, free, and active, and he preaches by example. 
His garden, which abounds in citron trees, is a nursery 
for the eucalyptus of every known kind, and he gives 
the seed to any one who asks for it. In that garden 
I saw something which touched me deeply. It was 
a grotto of rockwork covered with plants, and decked 
like a permanent altar of the Fete Dieu. A spring 
babbles musically in a basin, and in the murmur of 
it a shady bench invites to meditation. It is the 
tomb of this worthy man's only son. He passes his 
life there. 



 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE WEST COAST 

Lozzi Peo — Serafino the bandit — A surprise — Philosophical sketch in 
water-colours — Marie's triumph — The young Calenianese girls — The 
bridge of the Fango — Arquebusades — The Gulf of La Girolata — The 
Gulf of Porto Partinello— Les Calanches— Piana— The story of a 
taupe d foignim — A sham mouflon — The Saint Pierre fountain — . 
Carghese — Stephanopoli — The Gulf of Sagona — Calcatoggio — 

The house which was inhabited for years by the 
man whom they still call here the Corsican Prince 
is situated between Calenzana and Galeria on the 
west coast. 

The readers of ' this little philosophical journey,' 
written after the fashion of Sterne, will not, I imagine, 
be astonished by the curiosity which led us to make 
ourselves acquainted with it, if they remember what 
mouflon hunters composed our company, and they 



 



 

will judge it natural that its young chief should wish 
to visit the paternal and hereditary domain that he 
possesses in the island. The morning on which we 
left Calvi therefore nobody asked where we were 
going. We knew it was to Lozzi Peo. Lozzi Peo 
is not a village ; it is a solitude. There are only 
two houses there, the Corsican Prince's first, and 
another belonging to the Capifali family. It is 
only the latter that is furnished and can take in 
travellers. The other was totally pillaged in 1870, 
stripped and left empty. Nothing is left but the 
walls. ' Vae victis ! ' said Brennus. We could not 
hope therefore to sleep in linen or cotton sheets the 
following night, unless we carried them with us from 
Calvi, And then mattresses would have been 
wanting. But it was not the first time in Corsica 
that we cheerfully encountered the risk of sleeping 
on the hard ground, wrapped up in our travelling 
rugs, like bards of romance. M. Vincent Bonnaud, 
too, had calmed our fears. 

' If,' he said, 'at Lozzi Peo we find no beds, or 
chairs, or tables, I know of a lodging for us. It is 
the cavern of the celebrated bandit Serafino. It is 
to let, for he has been dead some thirty years. Per- 
haps we may have to turn out the mouflon. But if 
he is there we shall kill two birds with one stone, 
that is all.' 



 



The West Coast 243 

So we left Calvi in good spirits, comforted by 
these words. The road goes along the Gulf of Calvi, 
winding about among macckie that promised well, 
and the morning was charming. We passed rapidly 
by the little port of L'Alga, where Prince Roland 
showed us a curious house, which had also belonged 
to his father, and where this great hunter used to 
come to put his gaiters on for his boar hunts ; and 
we galloped past the picturesque point of Revellata, 
then the property of M. Barbe, minister of commerce, 
and planted with a vineyard. To keep up the happy 
spirits in which we had set out, our dear mouflonicide 
told us . about Serafino, and the exploits of this 
legendary hero in Balagna. 

' Serafino,' he said, ' was as cunning as a monkey. 
He invented the idea of disguising himself as a 
gendarme when he went about the district, so that 
the gendarmes who tried to catch him were obliged 
to disguise themselves as bandits, which they never 
succeeded in doing. For the costume is everything 
in this sort of affair.' 

' Evidently ' (chorus of travellers). 

' As his wife sold fruit in Calvi, Serafino had by a 
flash of genius conceived the idea of forcing the good 
people of Calvi to deal with her exclusively. And 
so he had, blunderbuss in hand, monopolised the 
whole trade in carrots and spinach ! One must live !' 



 



 

' Parbleu ! ' (chorus of travellers). 

' Serafino was killed in his cavern after a forty-eight 
hours' siege by the gendarmes. He knocked down 
two or three before he gave up the ghost ; and when 
he was dead, very dead, the people sacked the shop 
and drove away the fruiteress. That was very 
human ! ' 

' Oh yes ! ' (chorus of travellers). 

Nothing could make us prouder than to have the 
honour of sleeping in the ' spelunca ' of so great a 
man ; and while descending the rapid winding road 
that leads to the Gulf of Galeria we were still drinking 
in M. Vincent Bonnaud's stories when all of a sudden, 
in the hollow of the valley, the country-house of the 
Corsican Prince rose before our eyes. A group of 
delighted people came to meet us, waving hats of 
welcome, and we recognised — whom ? Why, the 
whole Capifali family ! 

They had set out secretly the night before from 
Calvi to await us in the only habitable house in that 
solitary region, and they had prepared in a bower 
dressed with flowers and streamers a sumptuous 
repast, the last utterance of the cordon bleu, that 
admirable Marie, which reached _ our pampered 
appetites. The mouflon slayer's muffled laughter 
betrayed to me that he was in the secret ; his Serafino 
cavern was a hunter's tale ! 



 



The West Coast 245 

We left our young prince to go up first alone to 
his paternal house, so sadly rich to him in tender and 
bitter memories,and went ourselves to take some views, 
photographic or otherwise, of this once historical place. 
I, for my part, went away in a kind of reverie, for 
which the sketching mania serves as an excuse and 
to which it is favourable ; and as my colour-box is 
carried in a philosopher's wallet, I made an excuse 
to go alone that I might have a chat with myself. 
A whole chapter of contemporary history was hanging, 
as it were, on the peg of this Corsican country-house, 
perched on a rock, and my poet soul had here 
encountered a very singular accident, of which the 
contrast would have struck Seneca himself. 

If, on the day when my comrade Georges 
Cavalier, surnamed Pipe en Bois, had brought to me 
in a little house ■ in the Ternes two poets, friends of 
his, one named Marotteau and the other Victor Noir ; 
and if, after having invited them to sit down on the 
grass, and state frankly as they sipped their cognac 
their opinion on the overrated talents of Victor Hugo, 
to whom Alfred de Musset was infinitely preferable — 
if, I say, that day some one had prophesied to us 
that one of us four would belong to history and 
would have a monument like Rude's Cavaignac, we 
should all four have cried at once, ' Then it will be 
Pipe en Bois ! ' Cavalier alone was giving any promise 



 



 

to posterity. He was celebrated for having hissed 
the Goncourts' Henrtette Marshal, which moreover 
he had worn out his hands in applauding. This I 
know, for I was by his side at the first night ; but it 
was ordained that history should be written more 
strangely still. The good Cavalier died at Brussels, 
exiled for having been inspector of squares under the 
Commune. Marotteau ended cruelly in New Caledonia 
under the reign of Prudhomme sans PitiY, leaving no 
other fame behind him than the soubriquet of ' Roche- 
faible,' which the Cafe 1 de Suede gave him ironically. 
I am still at the oar, and of the four simple Zoilian 
critics of the sublime poet of poets whom the old 
Ternoise villa heard vociferating under the plane-trees, 
the one to whom the marble is inscribed is the one 
who said nothing. 

It is true the gods had marked him for a tragic 
destiny. In that drama at Auteuil which pre- 
cipitated the fall of the Bonapartes, Victor Noir was 
the piece of orange-peel on which the empire slipped, 
and perhaps fate has its demi-gods as well as 
genius. 

By a most discordant anomaly, Prince Pierre 
Bonaparte was then and always a rabid republican 
and a passionate democrat. There is no kind of 
doubt about that : that he was always in disgrace at 
the Tuileries during the empire proves it. 



 



The West Coast 247 

He had married among the people, a woman who 
might have been the mother of Victor Noir himself, 
and who belonged to a family as far removed from 
princely blood and political influence as possible ; and 
for this the court never forgave him. If any member 
of his family had a right to be surprised at becoming 
the butt for the hatred of men of advanced views, it 
was this poet huntsman, who had lived for twenty 
years in his beloved Isle of Corsica among the 
shepherds, composing in the intervals of partridge 
shooting an innocent tragedy on Nebuchadnezzar ! 

In this house at Lozzi Peo philosophical sentences 
and amorous verses are engraved on all the window- 
panes. If the man had a tyrant's soul, he must 
have suffered greatly in this solitude, for he had 
nothing to exercise his despotism upon. 

But everything is extraordinary in this world : 
there is nothing commonplace here except what 
people invent. 

I was asking myself what was the chain of 
accidents by which I had been brought from the little 
house in the Ternes to this country-house of Lozzi 
Peo where the window-panes are engraved with 
amorous devices ; for all this time I had remained 
the same : nothing had changed in me, at least in 
my ideas of philosophy. I had carried out and was 
still carrying out the strict, severe programme which 



 



 

I had drawn up for myself, — that 1 would be nothing 
but a literary artist. And here I was visiting, and 
visiting in the company of his own son, the house of 
the man who had killed the friend of my friend Pipe 
en Bois. Was ever the political scepticism of a 
traveller tried in such a manner by his politeness ? 

And now see what true liberalism is when it is in 
the blood, and when a lofty French urbanity adorns 
it with the decent charm of old breeding. The 
young prince with whom I was making this artistic 
excursion had not since the time of his tenderest 
infancy seen this old Corsican house, where, I think, 
he was born, and his filial emotion was certainly very 
strong. But he took care not to let anything appear 
before me. He had the exemplary tact to keep it 
for the hours when he was alone by himself, and 1 
could read nothing in his eyes but the pleasure he 
had in being my host. For there is such a thing 
as tact even in politics ! 

The son and heir of the man against whose memory 
— a subject for controversyat least — triumphant oppor- 
tunism is setting up and aiming a statue, is himself 
also in a position to raise one to his father, and that 
without subscriptions, and if he likes he can give the 
commission to Auguste Rodin himself. This statue, 
I warrant you, would be received with enthusiasm 
by the Corsicans, our fellow-countrymen ; for they 



 



The West Coast 249 

adored their Prince Pierre, and the memory he left 
behind him in Balagna is still green. But this statue 
the son does not order to be made, out of respect 
for the national watchword ' the pacification of parties,' 
which the Republic has issued to all good patriots. 
He is silent, he works, he is a man of study, and he 
sets all princes, militant or not, a rare example of 
civic honesty. Never, since I have had the pleasure 
of knowing him, him and his, has the name of Victor 
Noir been pronounced by any member of his family 
in. my presence, and yet no one, even among them, 
knows which of the two insulted the other. We must 
wait for history and its justice. 

The philosophical sketch was finished, and the 
sun, which was dropping into the Gulf of Galeria, 
brought us all back and assembled us in M. Capifali's 
house, waiting under an arcade for Marie's last 
culinary cftef-d'ceuvre. Ah ! what a masterpiece it was, 
and set off by what wine from what a cellar ! The 
very first cellar in La Balagna. In the character of an 
expert and of a defeated rival, — for I pique myself on 
my cookery ! — I went to compliment the great Marie 
in the name of all the mouflon hunters. They followed 
me in procession, napkin in hand. ' Madame,' I said 
with a certain solemnity, ' you have made a world 
out of nothing, and the gastronomes bless you. 
You have skill enough to discover truffles not only 



 



250 A WildSfuep Chase 

on the raft of the Medusa, but on the ship of war Le 
Vengeur ! ' 

And we chanted the Marseillaise, that war-song by 
which Frenchmen express all their joys of peace of 
whatever kind without distinction. At this sound 
Marie, blushing with pride and pleasure, opened the 
door of a shed, and, like a fairy tale, twenty of the 
prettiest girls of Calenzana poured out on to the lawn. 
They lighted Venetian lamps in the trees and set 
themselves to sing the country songs. ' This is my 
surprise ! ' said M. Pascal Sinibaldi, the Prince's hunts- 
man ; ' I have collected my cousins and relatives to 
do us honour in the Corsican fashion.' So we learnt 
that M. Pascal Sinibaldi was a Calenzanese, upon 
which we congratulated him. 

Part of the night passed thus in listening to music 
under the rain of the stars, and the marvellous 
Vizzavona evening found its pendant. 

But alas ! as the proverb says, there is no 
company so charming but it must separate, and the 
morning after this Italian night we set out to rejoin 
the great west road. 

It is new, and few tourists have traversed it before 
us,at least if one can trust the accounts of excursionists. 
But it is nevertheless, without any possible doubt, the 
most beautiful in the island. It runs from Calvi to 
Bonifacio along the shores of all those shining 



 



The West Coast 251 

porphyry gulfs which the sun every evening sets on 
fire with his crimsons, and leaves them so. One's 
eyes are in a state of continual enchantment, and the 
succession of pictures is always so majestic in its 
variety that emotion overcomes you. The human 
soul communes with nature in silence. Only the 
wind speaks, and gives voice to the expanse. 

At the bridge of the Fango, near Galena, a 
number of men, mounted on those little Corsican 
horses which are the sons of the North Wind, like 
Jugurtha's Numidian coursers, barred our passage. 
There were a hundred of them, armed with threatening 
blunderbusses, and they looked from a distance 
forbidding enough. We alighted, doubtful what their 
intentions were, and the idea that we were in for an 
adventure of the Gil Bias sort crossed our minds. 
Should we be obliged to have a brush with them 
before we could pass the bridge ? Our young chief 
went in front, firmly resolved to do honour to a great 
uncle of his whose military life began at the bridge 
of Areola, when at sight of him a discharge of 
artillery rent the air and gave attestation to peaceful, 
even enthusiastic intentions ! The Corsicans express 
all their feelings by rifle-shots, and especially their 
pleasure at seeing you. 

The young men of Galeria, like the girls of Calen- 
zana, had come to salute in their own fashion the son 



 



 

of the popular Prince ever loved in La Balagna. They 
escorted us like a guard of honour for several miles 
as far as the Gulf of La Girolata, in one long deafening 
apotheosis. 

Scarlet this fiord was ! It is cut in gigantic cliffs 
of coral, ruby, and garnet, but no colourist would 
venture to impose such splendour upon the ignorant 
formula; of men of taste. See Art Criticism. 

All the coast is like this, however, and sings up 
and down the scale of red with its fiery harmonies, 
scarcely softened by the shadows, and the green of 
the macckie serves but to heighten still more the 
flaming tones. 

The Gulf of Porto, more blinding still, is like the 
development of a scheme of colour. It is the Gulf 
of Galeria magnified, and treated by a Rubens. To 
enjoy the magnificence of this landscape, to saturate 
your eyes with it, to bathe up to your soul in it, it 
is best to stop for an hour at the village of Partinello, 
which commands the bay, and where you find a good 
little inn, very well supplied with provisions besides. 
Partinello is not really a village ; it is a staircase. 
The houses are placed one above another on a 
slippery incline, and if they were not held up by 
great trees, they would fall into the sea, like the 
sheep of Panurge. 

There we saw two pretty weavers, installed on the 



 



The West Coast 253 

very highroad, working at their rustic looms, and 
certainly making their cloth of the floating sunbeams, 
which were darting about in the air on all sides, 
even into their tangled hair. 

At the head of this extraordinary gulf, which one 
day or other, I am certain, will be famous and peopled 
with grand hotels and villas, you pass a hamlet of no 
importance, at least from the number of its inhabi- 
tants. It is named Porto, and it has given its name 
to the creek. It is at Porto that the pines are 
shipped, and the larches, and all the woody giants 
that the State, that insatiable woodman, cuts down in 
the forest of Valdoniello. The square tower, perched 
on a flaming rock projecting into the middle of the 
waves, is a perfect specimen of the fortifications with 
which the Genoese encircled the island. Its naive 
picturesque uselessness is the keynote of this unfor- 
gettable solitude. It serves as a place of rest for the 
tired seabtrds. 

Between Porto and Piana the road waves about 
along the precipices like a loose scarf in the wind. 
The green rocks, round which twist fragrant climbing 
plants, are dotted over with innumerable lizards, like 
pins in a pincushion. Slow processions of beetles 
cross the road like files of monks in cowls. The sea- 
breeze alone renders the heat bearable, and all of a 
sudden you enter the defile of the Calanches. 



 



 

The defile of the Calanches is famous, and has 
always passed, not without reason, for the chef deeuvrt 
of nature in this island. The guide-books extol it 
almost at the cost of all the other places, and no 



Englishman would fail to visit it, because he would 
think that not having seen that, he had not seen 
Corsica. He would be right, although I prefer La 
Scala di Santa Regina, with its romantic clefts and 
fissures. There is no doubt that the Calanches 
deserve their European fame. 



 



The West Coast 255 

It is Pelion piled on the top of Ossa. A sort 
of heavenly heap of coloured granite, of every 
form, monoliths round, oval, square, oblong, cubes, 
crests, basins, leg-bones, mushrooms, gourds, and any- 
thing else you can think of, a Wall of China, dry and 
mortarless, with the light streaming in at all the holes, 
the millions of holes in which lodge millions of little 
saurians, the distrustful friends of man. 

The sea-breeze wears away, and polishes in a 
singular manner the stones of this motionless ava- 
lanche. It gives it the appearance of a colossal heap 
of bones fallen from a neighbouring planet, whose 
inhabitants were 100 cubits in height. You can 
distinguish some skeletons left entire. 

If you were to discover somewhere on the earth 
the fabulous battle-field where the Titans attacked 
Jupiter and fell, struck by thunderbolts, I imagine 
the cemetery would resemble the Calanches. 

We went through it during a splendid sunset, 
followed by a twilight so strange that it seemed like 
the natural and suitable light for such a fantastic 
city of the dead. A dim half light which you might 
call subterranean, with faint glimmers here and there, 
caught the edges of the rocks. Great breadths of 
shade fell upon them, magnifying their forms, and 
marking their outlines in burlesque silhouettes, which 
fancy delighted in making more precise, and all the 



 



 

dreams of fever took form and made themselves 
real, ludicrous, or terrible, to our deluded eyes. 

And we arrived at Piana in the condition of people 
who have just seen phantoms. 

Piana is an important town, where 1400 of God's 
creatures enjoy the benefits of life and the charms of 
civilisation. I noticed nothing there which was worth 
the trouble of being pointed out to the attention 
of travellers, except perhaps the inscription on its 
church, which is a model of that scholastic Latin 
literature to which the Reverend Jesuit Fathers 
addict themselves, and which gave us our Rapins 
and Santeuils. 

Munera si quaeris rebusque levamen in arctis, 
Ingredere hue mat rem corde rogare Dei. 

If thou seekest benefits and relief in trouble, 

Enter here and pray from the heart to the mother of God. 

The distich is dated 1792, and not signed. It 
has that advantage over Horace and Virgil. 

In fact I have no other recollection of Piana but 
that connected with a certain soupe & foignon, of 
which I cannot even now think without blushing. I 
thought I knew how to make a soupe a toignon ! I 
had even rashly boasted of excelling in the prepara- 
tion of that concoction, which is the most difficult of 
all, and the very touchstone of the born cook. 



 



The West Coast 257 

Now since we had been perambulating the Isle : 
of Corsica the almost absolute want of butter had 
cruelly deprived us of this peculiarly Parisian pleasure 
of tasting the soup of the night-wanderers. 

Our beloved prince in particular was suffering 
much from this deprivation, and like Richard III, 
offering his kingdom for a horse, he would willingly 
have cried, ' My fortune for a soupe d loignon ! 
So I resolved to prepare a surprise for him, and 
profiting by a morning excursion which had carried 
him back again into those wonderful Calahches, I 
set to work to ransack Piana for some butter ! Aided 
by that good fellow Charles, his valet, I ended by 
discovering a quarter of a pound, and having 
collected all the onions that I could find in the town, 
we returned to the inn. Breakfast had been ordered 
for half-past eleven : it was now nine : I had time 
to compose a chef-d&uvre. 

We meant at first, Charles and I, to peel the onions 
ourselves, for there is no such thing as a petty detail 
in these matters. They were enormous things, real 
onions of Egypt, enough to make all the Hebrews 
in the desert weep, and our own tears flowed so 
abundantly' that we were obliged to give up the 
work. The landlord, his two daughters, and the 
servant undertook to fihish preparing them. 

I had on one side, as is proper, a' workmanlike 



 



 

saucepan full of boiling water, and on the other 
a frying - pan on the stove, and I stood and 
thought 

I was thinking, ' Ought the onions to be fried 
before you put them in the boiling water, or ought 
they to be put in the boiling water before you fry 
them ? ' Charles, when I consulted him, declared 
he knew nothing at all about it. To ask the women 
of the inn, who were watching us with astonishment, 
would have been to confess my incapacity. I drew 
inspiration from the circumstances. 

The circumstances were that butter was rare, 
and that we had only a quarter of a pound. We 
must husband it. I asked for oil. And when I 
had got the oil, I threw half the onions into the 
frying-pan on one side and the rest into the sauce- 
pan on the other. 

Then I watched ! 

At the end of half an hour one set were too 
much done and the rest not enough ! I looked at 
Charles. 

' Suppose we were to talk to the ladies about it,' 
he said. 

Unhappily they only spoke the Corsican dialect, 
and the Italian of us both, combined and mixed 
together, was no match for it. So I came to an 
energetic decision. I transferred the onions that were 



 



The West Coast 259 

in the water into the frying-pan, and the onions that 
were frying into the saucepan of boiling water, and 
then watched again. Those that were too much done 
shrivelled up, and those that were not done enough 
remained in the same state. I became pensive. 

The time was getting on, so I tried mixing them 
all together and waiting to see what would happen. 
The onions in the water and the onions in the oil 
mixed up together were cleverly removed to a pot 
which contained some excellent broth left from the 
day before. They appeared to get on very well 
together. So I salted and peppered and lighted a 
cigarette. 

All this time, under my precise directions, 
Charles was cutting slices of bread and toasting 
them on the point of a knife over the fire, and the 
women of the inn were peeling, peeling onions with 
no particular object. 

When the cigarette was finished I tasted the 
concoction. It was inconceivably insipid. So remem- 
bering the capsicums that were hanging from the 
rafters, I added six to the mixture, and tasted again. 
It was too strong. I called for tomatoes. They 
went to get some in the village, and when they 
were in the pot the soup took a good colour. You 
might have called it the Gulf of Porto itself. 

Charles was beginning to be a little afraid, for 



 



 

he adores his master, and he was watching me out 
of the corner of his eye. 

' What do you think,' I said, to quiet his fears, 
' of some lemon juice squeezed in, and a handful' of 
juniper berries ? That would be appropriate to the 
place, and then they are very good besides ! ' 

No sooner said than done. 

' Is Monsieur going to eat his soup ? ' he answered. 
'For if Monsieur is not going to eat it I think it 
must be time to dish it up. There is no more 
bread to toast, and I hear the carriages coming 
back from the Calanches.' 

At that moment, indeed, the excursionists 
appeared at the door. 

' What a strange smell ! ' said M. Vincent 
Bonnaud. 

' Excellent,' answered the Prince ; ' onions, one 
would say ! ' 

Charles, trembling, served up the soup of Piana 
in the very pot itself. What that horrible soup was, 
there are not words in the dictionary to describe ! 
But Roland Bonaparte had taken in that it was 
intended for a friendly surprise, and before we had 
attacked our plates he had helped himself three times ! 

At that moment the little servant girl entered, 
writhing with laughter. She was carrying some 
butter on a plate t 



 



The West Coast 261 

I had totally forgotten the butter ! ! ! 

And all the mouflon hunters cursed me. 

1 It was only that that was wanting,' said the 
Prince very gravely ; 'ah! there was nothing wanting 
but a little butter!' 

And it is on account of this mot, worthy of a 
Louis XIV., that I am an ' Orlandist ' ! 

We quitted Piana with an unquenchable thirst, 
and decided to stop at every fountain. That soup 
had set our throats on fire, 

But we had hardly passed the last houses of the 
village when we perceived — the mouflon ! 

When one has never seen a mouflon, one has a 
right to form any idea of it one likes. Its form is 
optional, and its colour according to a person's 
disposition. Now on our approach there issued 
suddenly from the macchia a surprising animal, a 
little like the domestic boar, which set off gaily in 
front of us, and made game of the postilions as it 
ran before our galloping carriage. 

Such politeness indicated truly simple manners, 
native to the mountaineer ; and the naturalness of 
its bounding spirits, the quiet, unprepared fancifulness 
of its behaviour, would have deceived Buffon himself 
about its species, which had at first appeared to us 
porcine. 

Our guns, extracted from their leather cases, 



 



 

were already levelled at the poor beast, when closer 
attention made us drop our disappointed weapons. 
It was, and it was only, alas! a facetious pig of a 
gay disposition, who had come out to take the air 
and was going to see the country. He escorted us, 
or rather we escorted him, as far as the Saint Pierre 
fountain, close by Carghese. There he disappeared, 
and no doubt returned to the delights of a free life. 
May God grant him a long one, for he amused us 
much. 

Carghese is one of the curiosities of the Isle of 
Corsica. Ethnographers never fail to perform the 
physiological duty of coming here to study the 
result of a fusion of races. 

Carghese was founded, on the 14th of March 
1676, by John Stephanopoli, a Greek of Taygetus, 
now Maina, and descended from the Comneni, 
emperors of Byzantium. After a bloody struggle 
sustained against Amurath IV. and his Mussulmans 
in the mountains of the Peloponnesus, this prince of 
high lineage and of great courage resolved to lead 
his countrymen, the Mainotes, out of reach of the 
reprisals of the pitiless conqueror. He went to the 
republic of Genoa and asked them to give him terri- 
tory in Corsica. They gave him the part comprised 
between the town of Vico and the Gulf of Sagona. 



 



The West Coast 263 

There, at the head of 1 200 Klephts, Stephanopoli 
installed himself and created Carghese. He soon 
made a prosperous town of it, governed by the very 
codes of Lycurgus. In ten years the pieve had 
become the best cultivated in all Corsica. These 
clever, hard-working agriculturalists, the inheritors 
of the principles of Cadmus and Deucalion, had 
grown rich on the produce of their corn and vines 
and fig-trees. 

Envied by their neighbours of Vico and the 
Niolo, the Mainotes had to endure many attacks 
from the people of the land of their adoption ; and 
especially in the time of Paoli, when the fidelity 
which they very paturally displayed towards Genoa, 
their benefactress, half ruined the colony. They 
were burnt out, they were pillaged, and they owed 
it to M. de Marbceuf alone that they were able to 
rebuild their town. From that time they have 
allowed themselves to contract alliances with the 
Corsicans, which they had always resisted before, 
and now their Hellenic blood is so well mixed with 
Saracen-Cyrnian, that ethnographers have only their 
trouble for their pains, 

The combination, however, does not seem to 
have succeeded very well ; for if they came 1 200 
in number in 1676, in 1887 they were only 930. 
But, ever industrious and laborious, they continue to 



 



264 A Wild Sheep C/tase 

show the Corsicans a good example of the pastoral 
virtues, and their commune is a very model farm. 

The Gulf of Sagona is a very violent contrast 
to that of Porto. It is a fertile verdant creek, where 
the Liscia deposits rich mud and slime, soon clothed 
with heather, and shaded with the foliage of almond 
and cherry trees. It seems they might produce salt 
marsh mutton there marvellously well. 

At Sagona the eye reposes, and the mind grows 
calm again. The gulf is magnificent too, twice as 
large as the Red Gulf, and would make a first-rate 
harbour. It is very safe, and is the only place 
an all the west coast where I saw a boat. 
Maritime life is scarcely at all developed in Corsica. 

Calcatoggio is the last station where you rest your 
horses before reaching Ajaccio. The neighbourhood 
has a doubtful reputation as regards inns. It is 
certainly undeserved, and we drank there a stirrup- 
cup of excellent white wine, served with very good 
grace and cordiality by a very amiable innkeeper. 
They had just finished the vintage, and the whole 
village smelt of bad wine. 

Mezza via — A jacc io. 



 



CHAPTER IX 

THE SOUTH OF THE ISLAND 

Return toAjaccio — The Milelli grotto- -The "oracle — The Campo dell' Oro 
— Cauro — Sampiero and Vanina — For the Odeon — Olmeto — A bunch 
of violets— Corsican tombs — Propriano— In sight of Sartene — Our 
native land— Dolmens— Sartene— The Hotel Cesar— In lions— The 
old quarter— King Theodore— Story of a bandit of Sartene — The 
motiflon yard — From Sartene to Bonifacio — The convent of the Santa 
Trinita— Bonifacio— The chalk rock— The King of Aragon's staircase 
—The Marina— The Corsican Gibraltar— In sight of Sardinia- 
Sardinian bandits— The house of Charles V. — The Templars' Church- 
Caves — Porto Vecchio — Amsterdam — The mouflon 111 

Certainly there is nothing in the world finer than 
this Gulf of Ajaccio, of which one never tires. 

And what a climate it has 1 The very climate of 
Paradise, without a doubt. People have compared it 
to that of Mentone, but it is better still. At Mentone 
the changes of temperature are continual. Here 



 



 

equality reigns in the atmosphere. The sea breeze 
and the land breeze intertwine in a clinging embrace, 
and exchange a long sweet kiss in which one is 
enveloped. It is the place for physical well-being. 
You unbend, you breathe, you open out like a flower 
in the sun, you live ! 

I asked myself for the first time at Ajaccio whether 
man really was created to labour, and I had my 
doubts. The law did not seem to me certain. For 
here at last is a corner of the world where you 
have but to let nature rock you in her arms. She 
takes complete charge of your lot and of your health, 
physical and intellectual ; she will be everything to 
you, housekeeper, vinedresser, gardener, farmer, field- 
labourer, huntress, angler, cook, and even cicerone ; 
she leaves you nothing to do, I may say nothing to 
wish for ! She takes man from his bed at dawn of 
day, and puts him back again in the evening feasted, 
satisfied, charmed, amused, perfumed, happy, without 
any possible regret for the minute of eternity that has 
been lived. Schopenhauer would not have been able 
to write a line of his pessimist bible at Ajaccio. He 
would not have dared to do it, for fear the sun and 
the moon and the stars should have burst out laughing 
in his face, and knocked his spectacles off his nose! 

How then came it about that the most active man 
who ever lived should have been born in this city of 



 



The South of the Island 267 

dreams ? Alas ! how could he quit it, even to assume 
the empire of the world ! The empire of the world 
was there, in a little house surrounded by a grove of 
orange trees hedged in with Indian figs, on the edge 
of this enchanting gulf, with a boat, a cellar filled with 
the golden wines of the mountain, a numerous and 
prosperous family, some friends, and a dog. O 
Napoleon, what a madman he was, when one thinks 
of him here ! 

As I had not visited the grotto where legend says 
that he, still a child, meditated the conquest of the 
universe, I went to the Place du Casone in the 
Milelli garden, where this grotto is situated, and 
whence he dated his famous letter to Matteo Butta- 
fuoco on the 2 3rd of January of the year Two ; and 
there I invoked the Sibyl. 

But I do not know why the Sibyl this time did 
not reply. Seated beneath the three blocks of granite 
whose surface has been peeled away by the chisel of 
English tourists, and gazing at the sea in the proper 
position, I lent an attentive ear. At a certain 
moment, indeed, the voices of the two breezes, in 
collision doubtless, produced a vague, rapid sound, in 
which I thought I heard the oracle formulate this 
precept, ' Make verses ! ' I rose, and rising, read 
upon the rock this other maxim of wisdom, the 
complement of the first, ' Love Josephine ! * 



 



 

When you leave Ajaccio for Bonifacio you go out 
of the town by a superb avenue of great elms which 
runs along the harbour to the Campo dell' Oro — 
the field of gold — so called because of its extraordinary 
fertility. It is a delta of rich mud between the 
mouths of the Gravona and the Prunelli, where 
everything flourishes on a gigantic scale. If you 
planted a cocoa-nut tree it would produce in two 
months not only cocoa-nuts but monkeys! But, 
joking apart, it has the flora of Africa. Ajaccio lives 
upon this piece of ground, balmy with the scent of 
the mandarin orange. 

At the mouth of the Prunelli they showed us the 
Capitelli Tower, famous for Napoleon having eaten 
his horse there. He had been shut up there by some 
Corsican peasants who were partisans of England, and 
had revolted against the Convention. He succeeded 
in getting out at the end of three days, but his horse 
never came out again. It seems the young general 
had undertaken to reduce his own town from that 
tower by bombardment ! Broumm ! — Let us go on. 

You go up, up, up. 

You go down, down, down. 

You go up again. 

The sea is at your right hand, the mountains on 
the left. You seem to be going along the gilt frame 
of a mirror. 



 



The South of the Island 269 

Here is Cauro, with 800 inhabitants. Cauro is 
nothing, or almost nothing, in itself. It is a village 
composed of several hamlets surrounded with vine- 
yards ; but it possesses a philosophical mouflon, for 
it is the place where the great -souled Sampiero was 
assassinated ; and we stop here, hat in hand. 

It would be very curious now to read from that 
History of Corsica which Bonaparte wrote after 
leaving Brienne, what the little Corporal thought 
and said about this Sampiero d'Ornano, 1 this Corsican 
of the Corsicans, who was a rough sort of patriot. 
Unfortunately the book is lost. Nothing is known 
about it except what the faithful Las Cases tells us 
from Napoleon's own words in the Memorial de Sainte 
Hitene — that is, that being sent in manuscript to the 
Abbe Raynal, it brought its author some strong 
compliments from that famous proser. And that is 
all, I think. 

If any one finds the roll of paper anywhere under 
the accumulated dust of some old notary's study, I 
will buy it from him, if it is only for the sake of the 
passage in question. Sampiero, judged by Bonaparte, 
should make an entertaining page of historical 
philosophy. 

The good Sampiero, who only dates from the 

1 They have just been inaugurating a statue of Sampiero at Bastelica, 
his birthplace. 



 



2  

sixteenth century — that is yesterday — appears to me 
the very ideal of those troublesome bores whom poets 
persist in calling heroes, and sing about, when they 
have time, at the full pitch of their voice. If I were 
still on good terms with Porel, I would offer him my 
five acts about this tragic Corsican, who deserves 
them, and I would make the Od£on resound with his 
glory. 

I thought about it, moreover, at the time, at Cauro 
itself. They show there the porphyry ravine where 
the terrible old man of sixty-nine died a true Corsican 
death, the victim of a vendetta, assassinated by the 
relatives of his wife, the sweet Vanina. The landscape 
is superb, and would furnish the scene-painter with a 
subject for the fifth act which people would talk 
about for a hundred years after the hundredth 
performance of the piece. The Gulf of Ajaccio, vast, 
soft, and blue, encircled with the onyx and porphyry 
mountains in which it is set ! Those scene-painters 
would be lucky men ! They would make an 
historical picture by simply copying nature. For 
nothing has changed since 1567, and the Barbary 
fig-trees yield the same kind of figs as those that 
pricked the fingers of people in the sixteenth 
century. 

I will not insult you by reminding you of the 
history of the illustrious Sampiero Corso ; it is 



J¥ 



The South of the Island 271 

present to all cultivated minds. But this is what 
it is. 

He was a Corsican from head to foot, born in 
Corsica and wishing to be only a Corsican at a 
time when the Corsicans were Genoese, because the 
island belonged to the republic of Genoa. Now it 
belongs to the French republic, that is the difference. 
To an observer's penetrating eyes it is slight. Alas ! 
in 1500, as in (what will soon be) 1900, man — that 
is, civilised man — is qnly happy when his race is well 
established and his nationality very clear. Life, a 
hard problem any way, is not a sufficiently difficult 
enigma unless it is complicated with some anxiety 
about origins. He wants to know before he dies 
whether he will die in the skin of an aboriginal race 
or in that of a conqueror. And that he calls politics. 
It is for this science that men massacre each other 
in this sublunary world. Napoleon was one of the 
masters of this science. 

Sampiero d'Ornano (1498-1567) found therefore 
that his chestnut polenta left a bitter taste behind — 
that is, a Genoese taste. He determined to alter the 
flavour of it, and went first to learn the trade of war 
with a Medici of Rome. Then he came to France 
and served under Francis I. ; there he knew Bayard, 
they say, and formed himself upon his model in 
intrepidity, and certainly in honour. At forty-nine 



 



 

he returned to Corsica to marry- his cousin, Vanina 
d'Ornano, the most beautiful girl and the best match 
in the island. 

Having been very badly received and «ven 
imprisoned by the Genoese Governor of Bastia, 
Sampiero took advantage of the strained relations 
between Francis Land Charles V., Genoa's ally, to 
persuade the chivalrous king to send an expedition 
into Corsica. Francis gave him a flotilla, an admiral, 
a marshal, and some Turks, for he 1 had even some of 
them in his pay, that monster of a man ! With one 
stroke the island was liberated — that is to say, made 
French. 

But Genoa did not see things in that light. She 
despatched old Andrea Doria and his sailors against 
the revolted island, and by another stroke poor 
Corsica became a slave again — that is, Genoese. 

After that Sampiero had his work to do alone in 
the mountains. The vendetta owes its birth to the 
furious little war that he carried on against the 
occupiers of his country. The macckia was red with 
Genoese blood. I know my brave Corsicans well 
enough to be sure that they must have amused them- 
selves immensely during that period of their history. 
The polenta returned to its aboriginal flavour, and 
arquebuses rattled sharply among the torrents. Un- 
fortunately Francis I. yielded up his clouded soul, 



 



The South of the Island 273 

that great nose disappeared from the planet. 
His successor, Henry II., gave back Corsica to 
the Company of St. George. That was in 1559, and 
Sampiero was sixty-one years old, but you would 
not have thought him so much, for he had many 
fine children afterwards. 

But as he had not renounced the struggle for 
independence, and, more anti-Genoese than ever, was 
going from court to court, and even to the Grand 
Turk at Byzantium, to ask for assistance, Genoa 
began to lose patience. She tried to rid herself of 
him first by cold steel and afterwards by arsenic. 

And as the weak Vanina had remained at Mar- 
seilles, the crafty republic tried upon her those 
artifices to which later we are indebted for Mazarin, 
and which are as glorious in public life as they are 
contemptible in private, and absurd in verse ! 

This would have been the drama for Porel. You 
would have heard the secret emissary of the modern 
Carthage saying to Vanina, in different words of 
course : — If your Grace will do us the grace to come 
to Genoa to ask the same for your Sampiero of a 
husband, it is yours 1 

Vanina. — What, my lord ? 

The Emissary. — Why, grace for him. 

I am only transcribing here the passage from the 
Scenario. Porel, you know, accepts plays without 



 



 

requiring more than that. But all this would 
have been in verse, and in fine verse, I promise 
you. 

Vanina d'Ornano let herself be worked upon, like 
the good mother she was, by the Mazarins of the 
Genoese republic. The life that their turbulent father 
was leading scarcely tended to secure the future of 
her children. She took advantage of his being with 
the Dey of Algiers, trying to gain that barbarian to 
his cause, to let herself be carried off in a corvette 
belonging to the Company of St. George. She was 
going to ask for mercy for her Corsican Hernani, to 
humble the hero before those arrogant citizens, to 
seek for the peace which to her maternal heart was a 
necessity : it was renouncing independence. 

' Whither art thou going in that corvette, daughter 
of the Ornani?' {Scenario, p. 34). 

Alas ! she is going to the Odeon — I mean, to 
Genoa ! 

Fourth Act — On the sea. Tempest. The 
corvette driven by the wind. Vanina regrets her 
shameful act She weeps. She wishes to throw 
herself into the waves. The emissary taunts her 
cruelly. All of a sudden a Turkish shallop appears. 
It is Sampiero with a crew of Corsicans. Attack of 
the corvette. Combat ; the ship is boarded. Sam- 
piero captures Vanina. She has not touched the 



 



The South of the Island 275 

soil of the Genoese republic. Victory of the shallop. 
Corsican honour is saved. 

' Madam, you were about to soil my white hair 
and stain the name of Omano. You must die.' 
And the heroic old man strikes her to the heart with 
his stiletto. 

Here I was rearranging history a little, for it was 
at Marseilles and in his own house that the great 
patriot stabbed his beloved Vanina. But I was not 
bent on the alteration, and if Porel had wished, I 
would have returned to the actual facts. Marseilles 
in the sixteenth century might employ the scene- 
painter's brush very happily, and the two scenes are 
pretty equal from a decorative point of view. 

The end of Sampiero is well known, and I shall be 
revealing it to nobody by saying that for three or 
four years still he hotly pursued that warfare in the 
macckia of which he was the founder and originator. 
Genoa would never have made an end of this pro- 
digious hero, and would have worn out her fleets in 
the attempt if the Corsican had not been assassinated 
in his turn by Vanina's relatives. ' They that take the 
sword shall perish with the sword,' said Wisdom. 

Decoyed into an ambush, the old soldier of sixty- 
nine had only time to cry, ' Save thyself! ' to that son 
of his who was to become one day a marshal of France ; 
then he threw himself upon his three traitor cousins, 



 



 

brought down one, wounded another, and was over- 
thrown by the infamous Vittolo, his creature, who 
shot him from behind with a pistol. 

He is a figure too, that Vittolo. What a part ! I 
have no luck with Porel. 

En voiture, philosophers ! 

And now you begin to go up again. We ascend 
to a height of 2900 feet, to the Col di San Giorgio, 
where the view is first-rate. You can see at once the 
whole of the deep valley of Ornano, watered by the 
Taravo, a fine torrent as sonorous as its name. What 
is it shouting to those cascades which come pouring 
down from among the white villages ? And what 
are those cascades replying? The name of Sampiero 
perhaps. 

And now you go rolling down again. You roll 
down to Olmeto, a very interesting little town, the 
feudal look of which I have still before my eyes. 
Olmeto is crouching, that is the word, under the high 
rocks, like those Atlas panthers which sleep gazing at 
the sea. The general aspect of it is sombre, almost 
repulsive, and it looks askance over the bay of 
Propriano. 

It is at Olmeto that the ancient family of the 
Galloni d'Istria resides. Of course we did not deny 
ourselves the pleasure of calling upon people of this 
class, whose kindness is proverbial in Corsica, and I 



 



The South of the Island 277 

have carefully preserved a little bouquet of flowers 
which was given to me in that pretty terraced house 
by a young girl to whom my humble name as a poet 
was not quite unknown. 

She quoted as she offered them to me a certain 
poem called ' Enguerrande,' the scene of which is laid 
in Corsica, — a chimerical Corsica, it is true, with a 
Shakespearian geography ; but still she had read it, 
and remembered this line in it — 

Les fleurs de la patrie ont Ie plus doux parfum. 

Her bouquet was of violets. 

You descend to Propriano by a road bordered 
with tombs like the Appian way. They have all the 
luck, these Corsican fellows, who are always com- 
plaining ! They can keep their dead out of those 
great cemeteries, where grief is made so common- 
place. They are permitted to construct mausoleums 
in their gardens, by the side of the roads, near 
fountains, and every piece of ground is to them holy 
and consecrated earth. So they escape from the 
sadness of a morose religion, which makes the soul's 
departure a tragic thing, and seems too distrustful of 
the wisdom of its God. 

Yes, I envy Corsica this privilege, and I should 
like to sleep myself, when my hour is come, in the 
place where I have lived and loved and worked so 



 



 

hard, by the side of the road where the mule-bells 
are tinkling, and the lovers are walking in pairs, and 
my bones would rattle gaily at the rude jolts of the 
diligence. 

But it is only these Corsican fiends who may do 



Propriano. Nobody doubts the maritime im- 
portance of the Propriano roadstead, and people in 
the island are counting much on the future develop- 
ment of this port. Besides being the nearest place 
to the Baracci baths — where is a spring of almost 
miraculous virtue for rheumatic patients, which they 
are trying to bring into fashion — it is also the only 
market for the produce of Sartene and its rich 
district. 

M. Conte-Grandchamps, whose excellent work one 
must always quote when the ports of Corsica are in 
question, predicts for Porto-Polio (that is the name 
of the anchorage) a future not far distant and well 
deserved : ' Porto-Polio will be, after Isola Rossa, the 
most frequented port on the west coast. Its trade 
will extend up the largest, most fertile, and best 
cultivated river basins in the south of Corsica ; the 
productions of the island will flow to it along the 
valleys of the Rizzanese and the Taravo ' (M. Conte- 
Grandchamps, Les Corse, p. 92, 1859). 



 



The South of the Island 279 

Thus prophesied science in 1859, and little by 
little the prophecy is being realised. Propriano is 
growing every day, and whole streets are being built. 
This is another town which is being founded. 

Already a regular service of steamboats connects 
this infant port with that of Ajaccio, and they run 
four times a week. The passage is only three 
hours, and it is a charming pleasure excursion on the 
open sea, along the coast, an excursion which one 
must make under pain of regretting it for ever after. 
A troop of tunny fish in high spirits leaped about 
round the ship, like Raphael's dolphins in the Rape 
of Galatea. The panorama of the gulfs displayed 
for us its shifting scenes, and the sea spread its 
shining waves like an Eastern carpet in our path. 

And then there is bouillabaisse in the very 
steamer itself. Captain Carbone, I tell you the 
truth, that bouillabaisse was good ; a little more 
saffron and I would sing its praises. 

From Propriano to Sartene you go singing all 
the time along a corkscrew road. When I say you 
sing all the time, I mean that that was how we at 
least corkscrewed. We were actually entering the 
canton in which flourished the fabulous Nemorino, 
mouflon by profession and the cause of the voyage, 
and we were going to see that austere town where 



 



280 A WildSfuep Chase 

our dear Vincent Bonnaud was born, the model of 
unclouded philosophy and of unvarying gaiety in 
these days of universal pessimism. 

A very natural emotion which that excellent man 
tried in vain to hide had seized him from the time 
we reached the Rizzanese bridge. But when the 
road turned and he perceived the great mass of the 
Incudine in the green valley, an enormous garnet 
set in emerald — then Sartene, his own Sartene ! 
fastened to the mountain like a bas-relief to a wall, 
and the familiar landscape of his childhood, the eyes 
of the poor mouflon hunter filled with tears. 

What a strange thing is this love of civilised man 
for the spot where he chanced to come forth out of 
nothingness ! This psychological problem has never 
been studied as it ought to be, and to sing about it 
is not to explain it. One's native town ? why does 
one love it more than ail others, even if it is ugly, 
even if one has suffered there ; and whence comes this 
close attachment, for it is close, to the places where 
the sadness of life has been revealed to us ? 

L'homme n'esl-il done fail que pour un coin de terre, 
Pour y Mtir son nid et pour y vivre un jour ? 

Thus Alfred de Musset interrogates the human 
soul, and up to the present time she has not 
answered him. 



 



The South of the Island 281 

One prefers one's own village to all others in the 
canton. 

One prefers one's own canton to all others in the 
department. 

One prefers one's own department to all others 
in the province. 

One prefers one's own province to all others in 
one's country. 

One prefers one's own country to all others in 
Europe. 

One prefers Europe to the other four quarters of 
the globe. 

One prefers the globe to — what ? 

It is just the game of the circles growing larger 
and larger round the stone thrown into the pond. 
The good circle is the smallest ; but if the last 
circumference is infinite, has it not the same central 
point ? Well then ? 

Alas ! how you cling to the earth from which 
you were made, miserable creature, burdened with a 
soul ! A flying reptile, who knows not how to fly 
and yet has wings ! Strange anomaly of nature, an 
angel entangled in matter, a native of infinity 
bound by time and immured in a form which is not 
your own ! What despair brings you back to die 
where you were born, on the six feet of mud where 
your mother brought you forth with cries ? 



 



 

Where the road we were climbing was intersected 
by the road to Santa Lucia di Tallano, — a pretty 
little town, which has the only quarry of orbicular 
granite in the world, — we came suddenly upon some 
dolmens! Yes, dolmens like those in Brittany! 
They deny themselves nothing, these Corsicans. 
Two Druidical stones arranged like an altar in 
the middle of a field, which they call here the 
' Stantari.' These menhirs, which are mentioned by 
Prosper Mlrimee in his Voyage ArchMogique, have 
been classed and have taken their place among 
historical monuments. They prove clearly to the 
minds of those who can read the stone book of 
nature that the worship of the Gallic Hercules 
prevailed in the island, and that the superb valley 
of the Rizzanese, now an immense and prosperous 
vineyard, which sends to Paris almost all the wines 
called Corsican, has listened to the chant of the 
prophetic Velledas. Perhaps they had mouflons 
attached to their persons ! 

Sartene, nearly 1 000 feet above the level of the 
great bouillabaisse pot, is in fact nothing but a long 
terrace, which, instead of running along the sea-shore, 
runs along the edge of a precipitous valley. From 
the height of this terrace its 4800 vine-dressers watch 
the grapes growing, as they smoke their pipes, just 
as from a casino one watches the little boats passing. 



 



The South of I he Island 283 

They may indeed have that spectacle in addition, 
for they can see over the Propriano roadstead, which 
is only some eight miles distant. 

In population the town is the fourth in the island, 
and has only 1000 fewer souls than Corte. And 
that, perhaps, they make up in quality ; for the 
Sartenese are rough fellows, made of steel as to their 
physical nature, and of fire as to their moral. They 
are the most passionate of all the Corsicans. 

I do not know what you are permitted to joke 
about in Sartene, but not about politics certainly, 
nor on the question of band it ism. These two are for- 
bidden subjects for the most harmless philosophical 
irony. If it were the custom to train sub-prefects 
before making use of them, they should be sent to 
Sartene for their apprenticeship, for election days 
are not fete days there. Mercy on us ! Here is one 
municipality indeed where public life is active ! 

On the great Place of the church, which is like 
the roof of a tower, at the sacred hour of constitu- 
tionals, you should watch the Sartenese walking 
about in sympathetic groups, with dark glances 
passing between the different clans, if you wish to 
know how the reconciliation of parties is advancing 
in Corsica. I knew all about it at the end of three 
days, and only crossing that Place de la Discorde 
would send me mad. 



 



 

But it is very pretty all the same, with its 
charming public fountain, round which gather grave 
Nausicaas moving slowly ; its churches, its cafis A 



Fitalienne, and the romanesque gate which leads to 
the old town. Carved balconies garlanded with 
climbing plants frame rosy apparitions of elegant 



 



The South of the Island 285 

city dames, and at times shepherds wearing the 
traditional pelone of rough goat's hair cross it, 
whistling mountain airs and eyeing us with the 
searching glance of sorcerers. 

The hotel where we stopped at is kept by a chef 
worthy to bear that name of Caesar which would 
crush any other man. He treated us imperially and 
in such a manner as to make us regret that his other 
name was not Lucullus, for he had a right to that 
too, if names signify anything. It was at his house 
I first saw that splendid mother-of-pearl which they 
obtain in such quantities in the bay of Porto Vecchio, 
the shells sometimes measuring nearly two feet across, 
and when hung upon the wall filling the room with 
tints of changing purple and shining silver. A 
photograph in a frame on the mantelpiece of the 
saloon attracted our attention, and we worried our 
memories in vain about it. We were all sure we 
knew that head, but none of us could succeed in 
naming the owner of it. 

' Never mind it/ said M. Cesar with a smile ; ' it 
is my son-in-law ; he is in lions.' 

1 In lions ! ' we all cried at once ; ' Bidel ! ' 

It was really Bidel, the celebrated and popular 
lion-tamer, dear to the prentice boys of the capital. 
We were stupid ! What other son-in-law could a 
man named M. C£sar have ? See what it is not to 



 



 

reflect. We made our host our excuses and our 
compliments. 

What there is curious at Sartene is the old town. 
Although it does not go back very far, it seems, for 
its foundation only dates from the sixteenth century, 
which, I confess, astonishes me, the quarter gives you 
the most vivid sensation of mediaeval life. Imagine 
a perfect confusion of little streets crossing one 
another, turning and zigzagging about, an incredible 
labyrinth of dark passages leading one into another, — 
the architect of which must have been a cat playing 
with a ball of wool, — staircases, vaulted arches, steep 
places, narrow bridges shaped like crosses, lozenges, 
half circles, and all sorts of other figures, and 
hardly two feet wide. Quite impossible for more 
than one to pass along at once ; and when you 
meet anybody you must take to leap-frog like 
schoolboys. It cannot be pleasant here to have a 
mortal enemy and to be obliged to go out. It is 
true, the want of space between the walls is a serious 
hindrance to the development of pugilism. A blow 
on the sinciput is instantly replied to by the counter- 
blow on the occiput. And then to separate the com- 
batants, the women have at their disposition the easy 
means of watering them from the windows without 
wasting a drop of the peacemaking liquid. A glass- 
ful is enough; it fills all the breathable space of air. 



 



The South of the Island . 287 

This old Sartene is extremely picturesque. I 
think it never sees the sun at any hour of the day, 
and that the moon is the only light that shines there, 
The children are very pale, and when they begin to 
grow a beard it is evidently the barbe de capucin} 
a lover of cellars and the efflorescence of saltpetre. 
And when at the proper age they begin to court a 
neighbour's lass, they have only to put a chair into 
the street and climb up by it to their lady's window. 
So in ancient Verona did Romeo, Juliet's lover, who 
is held up to us as a prince of gymnasts. 

And here arises a puzzling question. In the time of 
King Theodore there was no other Sartene existing 
than this old impassable Sartene, in which you cannot 
open your shutter without stopping up the street. 
Now history tells us that the Sartenese carried this 
king in triumph ! 1 should like very much to know 
how they set about it, in spite of all their enthusiasm. 
There is not room, I tell you, for an open umbrella, 
certainly not for a constitutional king. 

They show you here the royal house of this 
Theodore, legendary king of Corsica, a strange German 
adventurer, whose adventures resemble the historical 
mystifications of Tintamarre. But it is let out to 
lodgers, and it is very unnecessary to visit it, especially 
as there is nothing but the walls left, and we gave 

1 Endive, grown in cellars to blanch it. 



 



 

ourselves a dispensation. Besides it is not counted, 
and for good reasons, among the curiosities of the 
town. The Corsicans will thank you not to speak 
to them of Theodore. His history wounds one of 
their most delicate feelings, that of their independence, 
which at the bottom of their heart they are always 
regretting. They were sincerely devoted to this 
Baron de NeuhofF, who landed at Aleria on the 1 2th 
of March 1736 to make them independent and to 
deliver them from the Genoese oppression. Sartene 
was at once on his side, for the ardent spirits in 
this town are easier to catch than even the other 
mountaineers of the island. Sartene believed in 
Theodore first and last, and he promised too to 
make it his capital. When he ran away from his 
kingdom without anybody ever knowing why, Sartene 
remained faithful to him and waited for his return. 
Was it possible for her to see through, or in any way 
comprehend that disreputable personage, that mounte- 
bank, as deep in debt as any king, whom the fright- 
ful corruption of the century had cast upon the 
land of a pastoral people, whose long martyrdom 
might have moved to tenderness the tyrants of Asia ? 
Casanova de Seingalt, Cagliostro, or the mysterious 
Comte de Saint Germain, if any of them had landed 
to save them, they would have believed in him. 
Such a hazardous escapade, such a stroke as that, 



 



The South of the Island 289 

was beyond the comprehension of their unsceptical 
philosophy. There is nothing more cowardly than 
to cheat a child, and Corsica was a child. With 
open-eyed astonishment she trusted Theodore. She 
loved him for his fine theatrical costumes, his pomp 
and show, his ostentatious vices ; for the playthings 
he danced before her eyes. He seduced her and 
then left her. He had been a king. That was all 
he wanted to dazzle his creditors. He gained some 
delusive renewal of credit, but hopelessly in debt, a 
gambler, hunted and starving, he ended by falling 
into the hands of the London police, and died in the 
Tower. 1 The poor Corsicans went on waiting for 
him, and their deception mortifies them to this day. 

Alas ! there are some of these unscrupulous 
adventurers who do succeed sometimes. There are 
some who achieve their end, and reign even over the 
most sceptical of all nations, and reign even for 
twenty years, until the cataclysm. Console your- 
selves, men of Sartene, the continent also has had its 
Theodores. 

1 Not in the Tower ; nor did he actually die in prison. Any one 
who goes inlo the pretty little garden which has been made out of the 
churchyard of St. Anne's, Soho, will see on the wall of the church a 
tablet with the following singular inscription to the memory of this 
singular personage : — 

' Near this place is interred Theodore, King of Corsica, who died 
in this parish, December II, 1756, immediately after leaving the 
King's Bench Prison, by the benefit of the Act of Insolvency, in 
consequence of which he registered his Kingdom of Corsica, for the 
use of his creditors.' — Tr. 



 



 

In a family feud, and such feuds are inextinguish- 
able, a man of Sartene was killed some years ago. 
He left two sons, Giacomo and Giovanni. As soon 
as he had buried his father in the very spot where 
he was assassinated, as is the custom here, Giacomo, 
the elder, took his gun, and went off into the macchia. 
In his eyes it was his duty to surprise the assassins, 
and either kill them or fall himself. These tragic 
customs seem quite simple in this department, and 
I begin myself to get accustomed to them, as the 
prefects, and functionaries, and priests of this en- 
chanted island do. If I had remained a month or two 
more at Sartene 1 feel that the idea of cutting 
Sarcey's throat would not have seemed anything 
out of the common. 

The second son of the victim, Giovanni, was 
finishing his time of service at Nice, and military 
discipline had served to ameliorate his philosophy 
without extinguishing his rancour, which, moreover, 
was very legitimate. As soon as he was free he 
came back to Sartene. He too was only thinking 
how he could avenge his father, but he desired to 
obtain his vengeance by legal means, and he counted 
upon the tribunals helping him either at Bastia, or 
at Ajaccio, or in any place where there were judges 
and lawyers and a copy of the Code. 

The assassins had found an inaccessible asylum 



 



The South of the Island 291 

in the Incudinc, among the pines and evergreen oaks 
and larches. With information regularly supplied to 
them by shepherd accomplices and peasants belong- 
ing to their own family, they escaped all the search 
made for them by the two brothers, and braved 
Giacomo's piercing eye, as well as the spectacles 
of the gendarmerie. But it was necessary that they 
should be surrounded and taken. If Giacomo 
wanted to have them dead, Giovanni wanted to 
have them alive, and he would have been satisfied 
with seeing their heads fall in the public square 
of Bastia. This French soldier believed in the 
Code. 

When one believes in the Code, one ends by 
believing in gendarmes. That is what Corsica ns 
call the continental delusion. Giovanni then be- 
lieved in the gendarmes, and went to find their 
brigadier. ' Give me some of your men," he said, 
' and I will catch you two of the most dangerous 
bandits of our beloved arrondissement. Of course 
it is understood I will march at your head, and if 
there should be any bullets flying, I shall be the 
first to receive them.' 

The offer pleased the brigadier, but as he had 
but six Pandours at his disposal, he could only give 
three to the young man, who was satisfied with that 
number, and they went off to the mountain. The 



 



 

three other gendarmes remained at Sartene to 
reassure the population and amuse the children. 

Three expeditions into the macchia, though they 
were conducted energetically by Giovanni against 
his father's murderers, proved abortive. The gen- 
darmes, not feeling themselves strong enough, would 
not venture into those fragrant cut-throat places 
where their guide wanted to take them. Perhaps 
their boots hurt them. It was then that Giovanni 
thought of a plan which may seem strange to 
boulevardiers, but which would make no Corsican 
sitting over his absinthe raise his eyebrows. He 
proposed to the brigadier to reinforce his troop, not 
with a supplementary gendarme, but with a bandit, 
and to make use of his topographical knowledge 
to get the men they were pursuing. These strange 
compacts are frequent, and I may say that they so 
complicate that endless question of the vendetta, 
that one ends by giving up any attempt to under- 
stand it. Everything is topsy-turvy in that marvellous 
island, bandits, gendarmes, shepherds, and mayors : 
at one o'clock you are drinking together in the 
Place of the town ; at two you are denouncing 
one another ; at three you are shooting at one 
another, and at four you are getting married. The 
gendarme ends where the bandit begins. If there 
were no costume to mark the functions of each, to 



 



The South of the /stand 293 

define the part they play, and distinguish the 
combatants, it would be impossible to say who is 
the mayor, for they all have red sashes. I 
recommend the study of this hotch-potch to the 
man who shall write a Handbook of the Corsican 
Government. 

Well, of course the worthy brigadier accepted 
with enthusiasm Giovanni's proposal to take on a 
bandit, and, as was necessary, guaranteed that his 
life should be safe. At a certain whistle he was to 
rise out of the macchia, at an appointed spot by a 
bridge, and put himself at the head of the little 
troop ; and at the whistle, at the appointed place, 
the bandit in fact did appear, armed to the 
teeth. 

It was Giacomo. 

The gendarmes looked at one another bewildered. 
The same thought passed through all their heads. 
Now you must know that the capture of one of 
these outlaws almost always procures promotion in 
the Corsican gendarmerie. If the bandit is taken 
alive the gendarme wins his stripes ; if he is taken 
dead, he gets the Legion of Honour. And they 
have the right to fire, if they choose, on any one 
running away or hiding at the sight of the con- 
stabular nose. From which come many curious 
mistakes. 



 



294 -^ Wild Sheep Chase 

III luck would have it that this fourth expedition 
led by the two brothers together, the bandit Giacomo 
and his younger brother Giovanni, the French 
soldier who had served" his time, succeeded no better 
than the others. It was impossible to drive out of 
the cover of his macchia in the Incudine the murderer 
of the two young men's father. The troop came 
back to the town. 

Giacomo was to separate from the gendarmes at 
the same bridge where the whistle had summoned 
him to appear, and they all set off to return, chatting 
together. 

When they reach the spot fixed upon for separat- 
ing, Giacomo embraces his brother, who goes off 
by a cross road leading to his village ; and then 
saluting the gendarmes, he turns to go back to his 
macchia according to the terms agreed upon. But 
he sees himself suddenly surrounded by three gen- 
darmes, who have risen unexpectedly before him, who 
fire at him point blank, and break one of his arms, 

It had occurred to the Sartene brigadier, who 
was as cunning as a monkey, to post the rest of his 
troop at this spot, so that if they failed with one 
bandit they might catch another. Poor Giacomo 
was one undoubtedly. To interpret honour in this 
sense was, according to this philosopher, to deserve 
the red ribbon. 



 



The South of the Island 295 

In spite of his broken arm,Giacomo had strength 
enough to make a dash into the thicket, and when 
they came to pick him up he was not to be found, 
for he had still the legs of a goat. The brigadier's 
face grew enormously long ! 

Meanwhile Giovanni, the soldier in the cross 
road, had heard the firing. Not imagining for a 
moment that his comrades the gendarmes, that 
corps ctMte, understood their plighted oaths in this 
fashion, he thought the friends and relatives of his 
father's assassin were attacking his brave comrades, 
and returning as fast as possible to their assistance 
he fires off his gun into the air to let them know 
he is coming. 

1 What is the matter ? ' he cries. 

' The matter,' answers that Machiavelli of a 
brigadier ; ' the matter is that you have just been 
firing upon us, and that right file, forward march ! 
I arrest you.' 

And Giovanni re-entered Sartene a prisoner. 
In default of thrushes they catch blackbirds in 
Corsica, where they swarm. 

The unfortunate Giovanni, mad with rage and 
crushed by this injustice, was carried from one 
court of justice to another for a year. Acquitted 
at Bastia, condemned at Sartene, and appealing 
everywhere, he went on fighting according to law 



 



 

most conscientiously, but without any result. So 
the day we quitted Sartene he had just taken to the 
macchia in his turn, and joined his brother. He did 
right. 

You may be sure, it is a matter of course, that 
we did not leave this unforgetable Sartene without 
asking to see the mouflon house in which the 
patriarch Nemorino lived and loved. But it exists 
no more. A house of six stories has been built 
upon its site. M. Vincent Bonnaud could only 
show us the lock, a marvellous Corsican lock, made 
of oak wood, the mechanism of which is a secret of 
the shepherds, and one of their little manufactures. 
Could we, after having seen the lock, doubt the 
existence of the mouflon-house, and consequently of 
the mouflon ? 

From Sartene to Bonifacio there is nothing to 
notice but the gradual change in the character of 
the landscape, and certain geological drolleries, in 
which the sea-breeze makes its appearance as a sculptor 
of grotesques. There is first the gigantic puppet 
which is called ' l'Homme de Cagne.' It is 3980 
feet in height, and you see it all over the south of 
Corsica. I do not know at all how to tell you what 
it represents ; that depends on the spectator's 
imagination. This 'Homme de Cagne' seemed to 
me a very vague representation of a bandy-legged 



 



The South of the Island 297 

man. Others of us saw in it an old woman bending 
under a bundle of brushwood. ' digri somnia' says 
Horace. 

The Hon of Roccapina is a more distinct form. 
The illusion is complete — a lion couching on a high 
rock and watching the coast. But would it deceive 
a real lion ? 

Pianottoli. You stop at Pianottoli, where the 
road to Porto Vecchio by the valley of Figari branches 
off. The valley of Figari, watered and fertilised by 
a stream, which ought to be called the Figaro, is the 
Beauce of Corsica. It is rich in cereals, and sends 
wheat of good repute to the Marseilles market. It 
is sprinkled with picturesque hamlets, which reminded 
me of the valley of Chevreuse. It was at Pianottoli 
we were made acquainted with the horrors of an 
omelette made with oil. As the place is much 
frequented, and grows every day in importance, I 
hope before long they will be made with butter. 

From the Col d'Arbia, which you climb next, the 
view extends over a wide and fine piece of natural 
scenery, which develops still more, and becomes 
wider and finer still from the top of a certain convent 
situated on the right hand dedicated to the Holy 
Trinity. The fancy took us to climb up to it, and 
we followed a venerable Capuchin father, whom we 
saw sitting on his donkey among the cactuses and 



 



 

Indian figs, along a winding road. And a lucky 
fancy it was. 

The Convent of the Trinity left a deep impression 
upon me ; there I understood for the first time the 
delights of the monastic life — as the Italians under- 
stand it, that is — in an enchanted retreat, where every- 
thing conduces to the pacification of the soul and the 
mystic far niente of the wise. 

A great garden of pine-trees, olives, and orange- 
trees of unknown age, with thick foliage and noble 
lines like an Arcadian vision of Poussin's ; white 
marble seats, with murmuring streams that ' are silent 
neither day nor night,' wide lawns of green moss for 
playing bowls, a smiling convent looking like a farm, 
a voluptuous little church where prayer smells good, 
birds' nests in all the clefts'of the rocks, rabbits under 
all the myrtle-trees, the air laden with the smell of 
the sea, an incomparable view over the white chalky 
plain of Bonifacio, the town in the distance, and 
farther off still, in the golden mist, that amethyst 
Sardinia ! Such was this La Trappe ! 

Ah ! in such a spot to tell the beads of a poem 
of twenty-four cantos, or rather to tell the beads of 
nothing at all ; to resign yourself softly to live and 
still more softly to die, draping oneself like a soldier 
in his standard, in the crimson of the setting sun 1 
What a dream ! 



 



The South of the Island 299 

But these happy rogues of Capuchins realise it, 
while we are toiling to bring up families ! And I 
thought (excuse me) — I thought, I say, that in this 
pious macchia they were bandits too, God's bandits 
certainly, but still bandits, and that no gendarmes 
disturb them. 

Bonifacio 

If the divisions of this book were to be in proportion 
with the interest of the topics, I ought to give a 
whole chapter, and the longest one too, to Bonifacio, 
for this town is the most original in character in all 
Corsica, and perhaps in Southern Europe. 

But it has been described so often, and it changes 
so little, that I should only succeed in reproducing 
what other travellers have written, who are all 
unanimous in their transports. It is singular that 
their descriptions have not led any painter to go and 
make use of this inexhaustible mine of pictorial 
subjects ; there is stuff for all kinds of palettes. 
When my colony is established at Algajola, I shall 
take them to Bonifacio for relaxation, and I fear 
some will stay there. 

Bonifacio is cut out of a block of chalk. It is 
a chalky promontory of which the sea is every day 
gnawing away the base, and which juts out over the 
raging waves like the prow of a ship. 



 



 

It is inconceivable how this fragile peninsula still 
holds on to the Isle of Corsica, and one of these fine 
mornings we shall hear that it has broken away and 
the town has crumbled into the sea. Then Sartene 
will become a seaport. 

The frightful cliff, which supports by some miracle 
or Other the houses of the citadel quarter, which have 
been, moreover, abandoned by order, hangs over the 
mouth of an abyss more than I 50 feet deep, with 
huge blocks for teeth, shaped like molars, and 
belching forth eternal foam. 

There is a certain overhanging terrace where a 
sentinel stands in his sentry-box with chattering 
teeth — 1 would rather not be he! The ground 
rumbles beneath his feet, and he lives actually over 
a continual earthquake. With pallid cheek he shows 
you a staircase cut perpendicularly, leading down 
into the gulf by 164 steps, which make me shut 
my eyes while I tell you of them, and which would 
be enough to cure me of the vice of smuggling 
if I were a smuggler. It seems they get up their 
cigars that way ! I do not believe a word of it, if 
you want me to give my real opinion. 

I am equally incredulous about a legend which 
says that during the fearful siege of 1420, when the 
starving heroic Bonifacians lived on cheese made of 
woman's milk, King Alphonso of Arragon hoped to 



, 



The South of the Island 301 

climb up into the town by this hanging ladder of 
stone. Not a bit of it. Tell that to the monkeys. 
A ladder for snails 1 

You enter Bonifacio by a rapid descent, shut in 
between two walls of white marl, and come out at 
once on the Marina. This Marina is a long basin, 
pretty much like the piece of water of the Suisses at 
Versailles, wonderfully sheltered from all the winds 
of the compass ; but the entrance is too narrow for 
ships of large tonnage to venture in. This incon- 
venience will make the fortune of Porto Vecchio, 
perhaps, for there the anchorage is equally good, and 
the harbour is accessible even for ships of war. 

A little Genoese fort adorns the basin of Bonifacio, 
and shows its pretty silhouette at the foot of the 
citadel. The Marina seemed to me to be a great 
market for cork, and I saw huge piles of it on the 
quays. They import cattle there too, it seems. It 
is by Bonifacio the oxen and sheep that Sardinia 
supplies enter Corsica ; I am not speaking of the 
mouflon, of course. The harbour is nearly 5000 feet 
across. It has just been made a torpedo station. 

From the Marina you go up to the higher town 
by a wide road, paved on one side for foot-passengers, 
and macadamised on the other for carriages ; you 
cross a drawbridge, pass two old gates built in good 
style, and penetrate into the palla civitas of Ptolemy. 



 



302 A Wild Sheeb Chase 

If statistics did not affirm that 3200 inhabitants 
dwell in this castle of the winds, I should reck,on its 
population at too souls, for I did not meet more, 
counting in those who were drinking absinthe at the 
cafe and the soldiers of the garrison. 

Not many children are born in this ancient Boni- 
facian city, no doubt because the ground shakes too 
much ; but there are some pretty girls there too. 

The hotel at which we craved hospitality is quite 
a new house, which seems bent on effacing from the 
guide-books that passage about the bad renown which 
the inns enjoy here. We were more than honourably 
treated — good supper, good lodging, and the rest. 

The ' Torrione' is the only one remaining of the 
three towers which you see in the arms of the town. 
It had three under Count Boniface, who founded 
it in 833, which is not yesterday. This count, 
enchanted at having given the Saracens a good 
thrashing in the straits, commemorated his joy by 
making a town in the chalk of the promontory 
which should rhyme with his victory. At the time 
of our passing through Bonifacio, October 1887, 
they were working hard at the new fortifications of 
the town, which they wish to turn into a little 
Corsican Gibraltar, because of a certain Italian island 
opposite named Magdalena, which the brave King 
Humbert is arming as fast as possible to prove his 



 



The South of the Island 303 

pacific intentions towards us. We visited these works 
of military genius and descended into some trenches, 
some well-lookjng trenches, beautiful trenches! Prince 
Roland, who knows about such things, admired them 
much. 

As for me, a layman knowing nothing whatever 
of counterscarps, I went back to the terrace and 
gazed through the transparent air upon the splendid 
panorama of the Straits of Bonifacio. A kind citizen, 
who was escorting us about the town, pointed out to 
me the little island of Lavezzi, a granite rock, upon 
which the Simillante was wrecked, with its 1200 
passengers, not one of whom escaped. ' For a month,' 
he said, ' we were busy at Bonifacio collecting the 
bodies of these unfortunate people, in the caves, on 
the beach, even in the harbour itself. More than a 
thousand were found. They have a cemetery to 
themselves.' 

Then he showed me Sardinia, in which you could 
distinguish with a field-glass the nearest white town 
on a background of dark mountain. 

' Another fine country for you to visit ; what a 
pity it is impracticable.' 

' Why impracticable ! ' 

' Because of the unbridled brigandage which reigns 
there. Ah, sir ! they talk of our Corsican bandits ; 
what are they to the Sardinian brigands ? I myself, 



 



 

who am speaking to you, I and my brother possess 
a farm of pretty good value, from which I get oil 
and corn, close by the white town you are looking at 
through your glass. We have been obliged to fortify 
it. Every night one of us keeps watch alternately 
with loaded gun and dogs let loose, and on Wednes- 
days nobody sleeps at all, masters or servants.' 
' Wednesdays ? why on Wednesdays ? ' 
1 On Wednesdays at sunset the Sardinian peasants 
of our canton allow themselves a night of robbery 
and pillage, as sailors allow themselves a day on 
shore. They roam the highways, relieve travellers 
of their luggage, pillage the orchards, and cram 
themselves to the throat. It is the custom. It is 
well known, and you have the right to defend your- 
self. But on Thursdays at dawn all these hypocritical 
rogues take up their tools again, and make their 
appearance behind the harrow and the plough, with 
the airs of saints. You would take them for Virgil's 
husbandmen.' 

' Wednesday,' I said, ' is Mercury's day.' 
At Bonifacio obliging people generally make you 
visit three things : the Catacciolo house, once in- 
habited by Charles V. ; the Templars' Church ; the 
sea-caves. The Catacciolo house has no interest 
except the legend attached to it. It is situated near 
a covered market, not far from the Church of Santa 



 



The South of the Island 305 

Maria. There is art inscription in Gothic letters and 
the arms of Genoa. The Church of the Templars, 
of San Domenico, is a building of the thirteenth 
century, Gothic, with some traces of Romanesque. 
Its battlemented octagon belfry is very curious. It 
is a kind of architecture which suits well with the 
genius, at once warlike and religious, of that power- 
ful order, the knights of which have left so strange a 
reputation that we are still puzzled what to think of 
their place in Christendom. It was in this Church 
of the Templars that I saw the most beautiful little 
Way of the Cross in the world. Fourteen panels of 
wood about a foot wide, in a style of painting so free, 
so deliciously executed with luminous touches, and 
an art of composition so effective, that if they are 
not by Watteau I do not know by whom they can 
be. It is certain, besides, that he did do some for 
his master Gillot, and that he gained his living at 
first by sacred pictures. Can it be that one of his 
Ways of the Cross was stranded at Bonifacio in the 
Church of the Templars ? 

The caves of Bonifacio are among the most famous 
in Europe. There are three which you can only 
reach by sea. The bad weather deprived us of the 
pleasure of visiting them ; we could not find a boat- 
man who would agree to take us, the waves were 
breaking so furiously upon the promontory, and the 



 



 

wind was so violent there. It is the only regret I 
took away with me from Corsica. You will find some 
magnificent descriptions of these sea-churches in 
books about the island, especially in Gregorovius, 
who exhausts his enthusiasm upon them. 



Porto Vecchio 

Our six weeks' excursion in Corsica ended at 
Porto Vecchio. Porto Vecchio, whose astonishing 
mother-of-pearl I have already celebrated, and which 
would grow rich if it turned it to proper advantage, 
is a town of nearly 3000 madmen, occupied entirely 
with politics, and forgetting to enjoy the goods that 



 



The South of the Island 307 

nature has heaped upon them. The choicest of 
these good things is a magnificent gulf, made on 
purpose to become a harbour of the first rank, and 
a naval station unequalled in the Mediterranean. It 
is true this does not depend upon them, and 
their 6000 arms would not be sufficient, with the 
best will in the world, to transform this deserted 
fiord into another Marseilles. For the present they 
have nothing but salt works. Is that enough for a 
gulf nearly 4000 feet wide, where a fleet might float 
at ease ? While waiting for something better to do 
the Vecchians amuse themselves with tearing each 
other's eyes out before, during, and after election 
times, all about this government which neglects 
them so. 

As they received our little caravan in such a way 
as to leave us with the pleasantest memories of good 
cheer, we wish them with all our hearts the lucky 
future that M. Conte-Grandchamps assures them of. 
Hurrah for Porto Vecchio, the future Marseilles of 
Corsica ! 

And the mouflon ? 
Alas! 

But what does it matter ? Besides, listen to 
this. 

The year after our delusive chase, I was in 



 



3o 

Amsterdam one day. Not knowing what to do with 
my body, my soul being given to Rembrandt, I went 
to the Zoological Gardens to distract it, and the first 
object which attracted my attention was — 

The Corsican Mouflon ! 
and it was labelled besides as follows — 

' Presented by M. Vincent Bonnaud ! ' 



 



CONCLUSION 

M. Carnot's official visit to the Isle of Corsica in 
1889 was a happy piece of policy. It was a good 
' move,' to use that atrocious parliamentary language, 
and the ' move ' was a ' success,' as they say again 
in the language of strolling players. As far as I 
know them, my Corsicans would be much flattered 
by this attention from the Republic, first because 
they are squireens and country gentlemen from head 
to foot, and then because they think themselves, 
not without reason, a little neglected by their mother 
country since the time of the Empire. To get 
nothing but deputies from a region so rich in natural 
productions of all kinds is not enough perhaps ; it 
has animals more rare and more useful among its 
fauna, coneys first of all. 

Over and above its strategical position, which is 
more interesting than ever, and by which we com- 
mand the Mediterranean — this is to bother Crispi, 



 



 

whose face grows indefinitely long whenever he looks 
at it — Corsica as a colony will be worth a little 
Algeria when we decide to colonise it. Nobody 
doubts that. But is it colonising it to measure out 
a half-mile of railway per right-thinking deputy 
every legislative session ? I have been told that 
where there is no railway there is neither commerce 
nor industry. They even explained why to me, and 
I remember I understood at the time. 

It was one day when I wanted to go from 
Ajaccio to Bastia by some method more rapid than the 
stage coach dating from the time of King Theodore, 
and consequently somewhat old. A sociitaire of the 
Comedie Francaise, profiting by Jules Claretie's direct- 
orial slumbers, had come discreetly to Bastia to hear 
one of my pieces. He had only three days at his 
disposal, being a semainier. Make what effort I 
could, I could not get to him by sea or land. The 
coach was the only means of communication between 
the two capitals of the island, distant the one from 
the other, as the ironical crow flies, less than Paris is 
from Fontainebleau, and when I arrived, my sociitaire 
was gone, — what am I saying? he was on the stage 
again ! 

Certainly an island where, from want of intercom- 
munication and practicable connection, you can fail 
to meet your friends in cases like that, is an island 



J¥ 



Conclusion 3 1 1 

in a state of savagery, or nearly so. The French 
department which it constitutes threatens to remain 
lying fallow and uncultivated, in spite of the riches 
(mines of silver, quarries of granite and marble, vine- 
yards, olive-yards, orange groves, jujube-trees, coneys 
and deputies) of which nature has been so prodigal 
to it. Corsica is as poor, in fact, as our own Sologne. 
They say that M. Carnot wanted to take stock of it 
after the fashion of Haroun al Rashid, his master and 
model, and that he had the following experience. 

One evening at the end of a journey, Potel and 
Chabot having gone to bed, the presidential traveller 
went out into the passage and suddenly, in the im- 
perious voice of the Executive, cried into the 
darkness, ' Some butter ! ' 

Potel and Chabot were asleep. M. Carnot, in spite 
of his civil list, was obliged to have some goat's-milk 
cheese with his tea, — and what cheese, good gracious ! 
A terrible cheese strong enough to draw a carriage, 
and which one of us had nicknamed ' extra horse 
cheese ! ' When M. Carnot had tasted it, he 
understood in what a condition Corsica must be, 
for he being a good housekeeper, knows that butter 
is civilisation, and that rancid cheese is the purely 
pastoral condition. 

Take notice that, for my part, 1 see no objec- 
tion to the Isle of Colomba remaining in this 



 



 

state dear to tourists, so neglected by its mother 
country that M. Elisee Reclus does not even mention 
it in his admirable Geography of France. But poets 
are bad judges in questions of progress ; and since 
we are in presence of a ' move,' it is of importance 
that we should ' move.' When the man representing 
the French Republic went through those fifty Corsican 
forests, which are the finest in Europe, and contain 
pines of a height of 150 feet, if he asked to whom 
they belonged, he was told, ' To the national domains.' 
Then perhaps he was astonished that no use was 
made of them, and that they were not turned into 
masts of ships, or at least into greasy poles. ' Ah,' 
he said, ' what waste of wood ! ' 

And his Haroun al Rashid glances gleamed with 
patriotic anger. ' Sire,' said the viziers, ' the diffi- 
culties of transport are so great, either by land or 
water, that it pays better to lie down and sleep under 
the shade of these three-hundred-year-old trees. 
The roads are so few that even the four quarters of 
the department are not connected with one another. 
Those that come to any end at all, come down 
vainly into valleys without railroads or creeks, with- 
out ports or ships. When the Corsicans wish to 
feel proud of being French, they go (on foot) to look 
at the column of granite lying in the grass near 
Calvi, cut once upon a time to support in the Place 



 



Conclusion 3 1 3 

Venddme the statue of the least curly of their 
countrymen. It has been there since 1805, watch 
in hand, that column ! It lies in despair some 30 
feet from the road, and less than 50 from the sea, 
and it is growing old. For the cost of the transport 
you may have that monolith of Algajola ; it is only 
a little less than 10 feet in diameter, by 64 feet in 
length, and your Republic is strong enough to carry 
it at arm's length. Here is a " move " for her ! ' 

Again, the impracticable nature of the island, for- 
gotten by the great national geographer, does not 
prevent me personally from sleeping, not at all t I 
strung my lyre, as was proper for a son of Volney, 
before that prodigious shaft of orbicular granite, a 
horizontal monument of the neglect as well as the 
riches of Corsica. I strung it again as a son of 
Chateaubriand, in those splendid, divinely neglected 
forests, whose sonorous cathedral aisles are shaken 
by the libeccio. More happy than M, Carnot and 
less executive, I gathered the cyclamen adored by 
Madame Sand, and listened to the morning chirp of 
the partridge. At the Col di Vizzavona, one evening, 
I pursued along the bank of a torrent full of trout 
one of those hobgoblins, fairy vampires which feed 
on the blood of new-born babes and come down the 
mountain in boats over the foaming cascades. I 



 



 

was on the point of catching it at the very spot, they 
tell me, where the station is to be ! So much the 
better ; that will change the Corsicans' ideas. They 
will hear the brazen bull roar, where I distinctly heard 
the legendary bark of wild dogs and the cries of the 
evil bird. I have seen the island before the ' move ' 
and before the presidential journey. Let them 
civilise it now ! 

The natives, moreover, think a little as I do about 
it ; and M. Carnot, if he listens to them, may have 
his government taken and squeezed between the nut- 
crackers of this dilemma. ' Did you come to civilise 
us, colonise us, Frenchify us, and republicanise 
seriously ? — or merely for a holiday ramble ? We 
only want to understand each other rightly. Since 
the time of Merimee, Corsica has been living almost 
entirely on the artistic reputation that that archaeo- 
logist made for it in one of his holidays. Colomba's 
glory has for us taken the place of commerce, of 
practicable roads, ports, and markets, and even of 
the postal service. It is thanks to that heroine of 
the vendetta that we even know there is such a place 
as France, and that we are a department of it. 

' We do not complain about it ; in fact, things go 
rather well so, for people live on chestnuts here, and 
even on strong cheese. But if our isle has only an 
artistic existence, what do you come here to do ? 



 



Conclusion 315 

You should rather send us Gustave Larroumet and 
a carriage full of artists. We will give them what 
we have : some fine wild landscapes, some picturesque 
bandits, some voceri, the vendetta, and all that 
writers or painters want. But if, on the contrary, 
the Republic of which you are the articulate incarna- 
tion, judges us worthy — as worthy (to speak with 
reverence) as Tonquin itself — to enjoy the benefits of 
scientific progress, see for yourself the condition we 
are in. Make it possible for us to get some good 
out of our soil, our air, our water, and to create a 
Corsican industry. Up to the present time we have 
exported nothing but deputies, vague representatives 
of our haughty poverty, and we have, thank heaven, 
other coneys for you to catch.' 