I was 37 then, strapped in my seat as the huge 747 plunged through 
dense cloud cover on approach to Hamburg airport. Cold November 
rains drenched the earth, lending everything the gloomy air of a 
Flemish landscape: the ground crew in waterproofs, a flag atop a squat 
airport building, a BMW billboard. So - Germany again. 

Once the plane was on the ground, soft music began to flow from the 
ceiling speakers: a sweet orchestral cover version of the Beatles' 
"Norwegian Wood". The melody never failed to send a shudder 
through me, but this time it hit me harder than ever. 

I bent forward, my face in my hands to keep my skull from splitting 
open. Before long one of the German stewardesses approached and 
asked in English if I were sick. 

"No," I said, "just dizzy." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Yes, I'm sure. Thanks." 

She smiled and left, and the music changed to a Billy Joel tune. I 
straightened up and looked out of the window at the dark clouds 
hanging over the North Sea, thinking of all I had lost in the course of 
my life: times gone for ever, friends who had died or disappeared, 
feelings I would never know again. 

The plane reached the gate. People began unfastening their seatbelts 
and pulling luggage from the overhead lockers, and all the while I was 
in the meadow. I could smell the grass, feel the wind on my face, hear 
the cries of the birds. Autumn 1969, and soon I would be 20. 

 



The stewardess came to check on me again. This time she sat next to 
me and asked if I was all right. 

"I'm fine, thanks," I said with a smile. "Just feeling kind of blue." 

"I know what you mean," she said. "It happens to me, too, every once 
in a while." 

She stood and gave me a lovely smile. "Well, then, have a nice trip. 
Auf Wiedersehen." 

"Auf Wiedersehen." 

Eighteen years have gone by, and still I can bring back every detail of 
that day in the meadow. Washed clean of summer's dust by days of 
gentle rain, the mountains wore a deep, brilliant green. The October 
breeze set white fronds of head-high grasses swaying. One long streak 
of cloud hung pasted across a dome of frozen blue. It almost hurt to 
look at that far-off sky. A puff of wind swept across the meadow and 
through her hair before it slipped into the woods to rustle branches and 
send back snatches of distant barking - a hazy sound that seemed to 
reach us from the doorway to another world. We heard no other 
sounds. We met no other people. We saw only two bright red birds 
leap startled from the center of the meadow and dart into the woods. 
As we ambled along, Naoko spoke to me of wells. 

Memory is a funny thing. When I was in the scene I hardly paid it any 
attention. I never stopped to think of it as something that would make 
a lasting impression, certainly never imagined that 18 years later I 
would recall it in such detail. I didn’t give a damn about the scenery 
that day. I was thinking about myself. I was thinking about the 
beautiful girl walking next to me. I was thinking about the two of us 
together, and then about myself again. I was at that age, that time of 
life when every sight, every feeling, every thought came back, like a 
boomerang, to me. And worse, I was in love. Love with 
complications. Scenery was the last thing on my mind. 

 



Now, though, that meadow scene is the first thing that comes back to 
me. The smell of the grass, the faint chill of the wind, the line of the 
hills, the barking of a dog: these are the first things, and they come 
with absolute clarity. I feel as if I can reach out and trace them with a 
fingertip. And yet, as clear as the scene may be, no one is in it. No 
one. Naoko is not there, and neither am I. Where could we have 
disappeared to? How could such a thing have happened? Everything 
that seemed so important back then - Naoko, and the self I was then, 
and the world I had then: where could they have all gone? It's true, I 
can't even bring back her face - not straight away, at least. All I'm left 
holding is a background, pure scenery, with no people at the front. 

True, given time enough, I can remember her face. I start joining 
images - her tiny, cold hand; her straight, black hair so smooth and 
cool to the touch; a soft, rounded earlobe and the microscopic mole 
just beneath it; the camel-hair coat she wore in the winter; her habit of 
looking straight into my eyes when asking a question; the slight 
trembling that would come to her voice now and then (as though she 
were speaking on a windy hilltop) - and suddenly her face is there, 
always in profile at first, because Naoko and I were always out 
walking together, side by side. Then she turns to me and smiles, and 
tilts her head just a little, and begins to speak, and she looks into my 
eyes as if trying to catch the image of a minnow that has darted across 
the pool of a limpid spring. 

It takes time, though, for Naoko's face to appear. And as the years 
have passed, the time has grown longer. The sad truth is that what I 
could recall in 5 seconds all too soon needed 10, then 30, then a full 
minute - like shadows lengthening at dusk. Someday, I suppose, the 
shadows will be swallowed up in darkness. There is no way around it: 
my memory is growing ever more distant from the spot where Naoko 
used to stand - where my old self used to stand. And nothing but 
scenery, that view of the meadow in October, returns again and again 
to me like a symbolic scene in a film. Each time it appears, it delivers 

 



a kick to some part of my mind. Wake up, it says. I'm still here. Wake 
up and think about it. Think about why I'm still here. The kicking 
never hurts me. There's no pain at all. Just a hollow sound that echoes 
with each kick. And even that is bound to fade one day. At Hamburg 
airport, though, the kicks were longer and harder than usual. Which is 
why I am writing this book. To think. To understand. It just happens 
to be the way I'm made. I have to write things down to feel I fully 
comprehend them. 

Let's see, now, what was Naoko talking about that day? 

Of course: the "field well". I have no idea whether there was such a 
well. It might have been an image or a sign that existed only inside 
Naoko, like all the other things she used to spin into existence inside 
her mind in those dark days. Once she had described it to me, though, 
I was never able to think of that meadow scene without the well. From 
that day forward, the image of a thing I had never laid eyes on became 
inseparably fused to the actual scene of the field that lay before me. I 
can describe the well in minute detail. It lay precisely on the border 
where the meadow ended and the woods began - a dark opening in the 
earth a yard across, hidden by grass. Nothing marked its perimeter - 
no fence, no stone curb (at least not one that rose above ground level). 
It was nothing but a hole, a wide-open mouth. The stones of its collar 
had been weathered and turned a strange muddy-white. They were 
cracked and chunks were missing, and a little green lizard slithered 
into an open seam. You could lean over the edge and peer down to see 
nothing. All I knew about the well was its frightening depth. It was 
deep beyond measuring, and crammed full of darkness, as if all the 
world's darknesses had been boiled down to their ultimate density. 

"It's really, really deep," said Naoko, choosing her words with care. 
She would speak that way sometimes, slowing down to find the exact 
word she was looking for. "But no one knows where it is," she 
continued. "The one thing I know for sure is that it's around here 



somewhere." 

Hands thrust into the pockets of her tweed jacket, she smiled at me as 
if to say "It's true!" 

"Then it must be incredibly dangerous," I said. "A deep well, but 
nobody knows where it is. You could fall in and that'd be the end of 
you." 

"The end. Aaaaaaaah! Splat! Finished." 

"Things like that must happen." 

"They do, every once in a while. Maybe once in two or three years. 
Somebody disappears all of a sudden, and they just can't find him. So 
then the people around here say, "Oh, he fell in the field well’." 

"Not a nice way to die," I said. 

"No, it's a terrible way to die," said Naoko, brushing a cluster of grass 
seed from her jacket. "The best thing would be to break your neck, but 
you’d probably just break your leg and then you couldn't do a thing. 
You'd yell at the top of your lungs, but nobody would hear you, and 
you couldn't expect anyone to find you, and you'd have centipedes and 
spiders crawling all over you, and the bones of the ones who died 
before are scattered all around you, and it's dark and soggy, and high 
overhead there's this tiny, tiny circle of light like a winter moon. You 
die there in this place, little by little, all by yourself." 

"Yuck, just thinking about it makes my flesh creep," I said. 
"Somebody should find the thing and build a wall around it." 

"But nobody can find it. So make sure you don’t go off the path." 

"Don't worry, I won’t." 

Naoko took her left hand from her pocket and squeezed my hand. 
"Don't you worry," she said. "You'll be OK. You could go running all 
around here in the middle of the night and you'd never fall into the 
well. And as long as I stick with you, I won't fall in, either." 

"Never?" 

"Never!" 

"How can you be so sure?" 

 



"I just know," she said, increasing her grip on my hand and walking 
along in silence. "I know these things. I'm always right. It's got 
nothing to do with logic: I just feel it. For example, when I'm really 
close to you like this. I'm not the least bit scared. Nothing dark or evil 
could ever tempt me." 

"Well, that's the answer," I said. "All you have to do is stay with me 
like this all the time." 

"Do you mean that?" 

"Of course." 

Naoko stopped short. So did I. She put her hands on my shoulders and 
peered into my eyes. Deep within her own pattern. Those beautiful 
eyes of hers were looking inside me for a long, long time. Then she 
stretched to her full height and touched her cheek to mine. It was a 
marvelous, warm gesture that stopped my heart for a moment. 

"Thank you." 

"My pleasure," I answered. 

"I'm so happy you said that. Really happy," she said with a sad smile. 
"But it's impossible." 

"Impossible? Why?" 

"It would be wrong. It would be terrible. It -" 

Naoko clamped her mouth shut and started walking again. I could tell 
that all kinds of thoughts were whirling around in her head, so rather 
than intrude on them I kept silent and walked by her side. 

"It would be wrong - wrong for you, wrong for me," she said after a 
long pause. 

"Wrong how?" I murmured. 

"Don't you see? It's just not possible for one person to watch over 
another person forever and ever. I mean, suppose we got married. 
You’d have to work during the day. Who's going to watch over me 
while you're away? Or if you go on a business trip, who's going to 
watch over me then? Can I be glued to you every minute of our lives? 
What kind of equality would there be in that? What kind of 

 



relationship would that be? Sooner or later you'd get sick of me. You'd 
wonder what you were doing with your life, why you were spending 
all your time babysitting this woman. I couldn’t stand that. It wouldn't 
solve any of my problems." 

"But your problems are not going to continue for the rest of your life," 
I said, touching her back. "They'll end eventually. And when they do, 
we'll stop and think about how to go on from there. Maybe you will 
have to help me. We're not running our lives according to some 
account book. If you need me, use me. Don't you see? Why do you 
have to be so rigid? Relax, let down your guard. You're all tensed up 
so you always expect the worst. Relax your body, and the rest of you 
will lighten up." 

"How can you say that?" she asked in a voice drained of feeling. 
Naoko's voice alerted me to the possibility that I had said something I 
shouldn’t have. 

"Tell me how you could say such a thing," she said, staring at the 
ground beneath her feet. "You're not telling me anything I don't know 
already. "Relax your body, and the rest of you will lighten up.' What's 
the point of saying that to me? If I relaxed my body now. I'd fall apart. 
I've always lived like this, and it's the only way I know how to go on 
living. If I relaxed for a second. I'd never find my way back. I’d go to 
pieces, and the pieces would be blown away. Why can't you see that? 
How can you talk about watching over me if you can't see that?" 

I said nothing. 

"I'm confused. Really confused. And it's a lot deeper than you think. 
Deeper ... darker ... colder. But tell me something. How could you 
have slept with me that time? How could you have done such a thing? 
Why didn't you just leave me alone?" 

Now we were walking through the frightful silence of a pine forest. 
The desiccated corpses of cicadas that had died at the end of summer 
littered the surface of the path, crunching beneath our shoes. As if 
searching for something we’d lost, Naoko and I continued slowly 

 



along the path. 

"I'm sorry," she said, taking my arm and shaking her head. 

"I didn’t mean to hurt you. Try not to let what I said bother you. 
Really, I'm sorry. I was just angry at myself." 

"I suppose I don’t really understand you yet," I said. "I'm not all that 
smart. It takes me a while to understand things. But if I do have the 
time, I will come to understand you - better than anyone else in the 
world." 

We came to a stop and stood in the silent forest, listening. I tumbled 
pinecones and cicada shells with my toecap, then looked up at the 
patches of sky showing through the pine branches. Hands in pockets, 
Naoko stood there thinking, her eyes focused on nothing in particular. 
"Tell me something, Toru," she said. "Do you love me?" 

"You know I do." 

"Will you do me two favors?" 

"You can have up to three wishes, Madame." 

Naoko smiled and shook her head. "No, two will do. One is for you to 
realize how grateful I am that you came to see me here. I hope you'll 
understand how happy you've made me. I know it's going to save me 
if anything will. I may not show it, but it's true." 

"I'll come to see you again," I said. "And what is the other wish?" 

"I want you always to remember me. Will you remember that I 
existed, and that I stood next to you here like this?" 

"Always," I said. "I'll always remember." 

She walked on without speaking. The autumn light filtering through 
the branches danced over the shoulders of her jacket. A dog barked 
again, closer than before. Naoko climbed a small mound, walked out 
of the forest and hurried down a gentle slope. I followed two or three 
steps behind. 

"Come over here," I called towards her back. "The well might be 
around here somewhere." Naoko stopped and smiled and took my 
arm. We walked the rest of the way side by side. "Do you really 

 



promise never to forget me?" she asked in a near whisper. 

"I'll never forget you," I said. "I could never forget you." 

Even so, my memory has grown increasingly dim, and I have already 
forgotten any number of things. Writing from memory like this, I 
often feel a pang of dread. What if I've forgotten the most important 
thing? What if somewhere inside me there is a dark limbo where all 
the truly important memories are heaped and slowly turning into mud? 
Be that as it may, it's all I have to work with. Clutching these faded, 
fading, imperfect memories to my breast, I go on writing this book 
with all the desperate intensity of a starving man sucking on bones. 
This is the only way I know to keep my promise to Naoko. 

Once, long ago, when I was still young, when the memories were far 
more vivid than they are now, I often tried to write about her. But I 
couldn't produce a line. I knew that if that first line would come, the 
rest would pour itself onto the page, but I could never make it happen. 
Everything was too sharp and clear, so that I could never tell where to 
start - the way a map that shows too much can sometimes be useless. 
Now, though, I realize that all I can place in the imperfect vessel of 
writing are imperfect memories and imperfect thoughts. The more the 
memories of Naoko inside me fade, the more deeply I am able to 
understand her. I know, too, why she asked me not to forget her. 
Naoko herself knew, of course. She knew that my memories of her 
would fade. Which is precisely why she begged me never to forget 
her, to remember that she had existed. 

The thought fills me with an almost unbearable sorrow. Because 
Naoko never loved me. 


 



Once upon a time, many years ago - just 20 years ago, in fact -1 was 
living in a dormitory. I was 18 and a first-year student. I was new to 
Tokyo and new to living alone, and so my anxious parents found a 
private dorm for me to live in rather than the kind of single room that 
most students took. The dormitory provided meals and other facilities 
and would probably help their unworldly 18-year-old survive. 
Expenses were also a consideration. A dorm cost far less than a 
private room. As long as I had bedding and a lamp, there was no need 
to buy a lot of furnishings. For my part, I would have preferred to rent 
a flat and live in comfortable solitude, but knowing what my parents 
had to spend on enrolment fees and tuition at the private university I 
was attending, I was in no position to insist. And besides, I really 
didn't care where I lived. 

Located on a hill in the middle of the city with open views, the 
dormitory compound sat on a large quadrangle surrounded by a 
concrete wall. A huge, towering zelkova tree stood just inside the 
front gate. People said it was at least 150 years old. Standing at its 
base, you could look up and see nothing of the sky through its dense 
cover of green leaves. 

The paved path leading from the gate circumvented the tree and 
continued on long and straight across a broad quadrangle, two three- 
story concrete dorm buildings facing each other on either side of the 
path. They were large with lots of windows and gave the impression 
of being either flats that had been converted into jails or jails that had 
been converted into flats. However there was nothing dirty about 
them, nor did they feel dark. You could hear radios playing through 
open windows, all of which had the same cream-coloured curtains that 
the sun could not fade. 

Beyond the two dormitories, the path led up to the entrance 
of a two-story common building, the first floor of which contained a 
dining hall and bathrooms, the second consisting of an auditorium, 
meeting rooms, and even guest rooms, whose use I could never 

 



fathom. Next to the common building stood a third dormitory, also 
three storeys high. Broad green lawns filled the quadrangle, and 
circulating sprinklers caught the sunlight as they turned. Behind the 
common building there was a field used for baseball and football, and 
six tennis courts. The complex had everything you could want. 

There was just one problem with the place: its political smell. It was 
run by some kind of fishy foundation that centered on this extreme 
right-wing guy, and there was something strangely twisted - as far as I 
was concerned - about the way they ran the place. You could see it in 
the pamphlet they gave to new students and in the dorm rules. The 
proclaimed "founding spirit" of the dormitory was "to strive to nurture 
human resources of service to the nation through the ultimate in 
educational fundamentals", and many financial leaders who endorsed 
this "spirit" had contributed their private funds to the construction of 
the place. This was the public face of the project, though what lay 
behind it was extremely vague. Some said it was a tax dodge, others 
saw it as a publicity stunt for the contributors, and still others claimed 
that the construction of the dormitory was a cover for swindling the 
public out of a prime piece of real estate. One thing was certain, 
though: in the dorm complex there existed a privileged club composed 
of elite students from various universities. They formed "study 
groups" that met several times a month and included some of the 
founders. Any member of the club could be assured of a good job after 
graduation. I had no idea which - if any - of these theories was correct, 
but they all shared the assumption that there was "something fishy" 
about the place. 

In any case, I spent two years - from the spring of 1968 to the spring 
of 1970 - living in this "fishy" dormitory. Why I put up with it so long, 
I can't really say. In terms of everyday life, it made no practical 
difference to me whether the place was right wing or left wing or 
anything else. 

Each day began with the solemn raising of the flag. They played the 

 



national anthem, too, of course. You can't have one without the other. 
The flagpole stood in the very center of the compound, where it was 
visible from every window of all three dormitories. 

The Head of the east dormitory (my building) was in charge of the 
flag. He was a tall, eagle-eyed man in his late fifties or early sixties. 
His bristly hair was flecked with grey, and his sunburned neck bore a 
long scar. People whispered that he was a graduate of the wartime 
Nakano spy school, but no one knew for sure. Next to him stood a 
student who acted as his assistant. No one really knew this guy, either. 
He had the world's shortest crewcut and always wore a navy-blue 
student uniform. I didn’t know his name or which room he lived in, 
never saw him in the dining hall or the bath. I’m not even sure he was 
a student, though you would think he must have been, given the 
uniform - which quickly became his nickname. In contrast to Sir 
Nakano, "Uniform" was short, pudgy and pasty-faced. This creepy 
couple would raise the banner of the Rising Sun every morning at six. 
When I first entered the dormitory, the sheer novelty of the event 
would often prompt me to get up early to observe this patriotic ritual. 
The two would appear in the quadrangle at almost the exact moment 
the radio beeped the six o'clock signal. Uniform was wearing his 
uniform, of course, with black leather shoes, and Nakano wore a short 
jacket and white trainers. Uniform held a ceremonial box of untreated 
paulownia wood, while Nakano carried a Sony tape recorder at his 
side. He placed this at the base of the flagpole, while Uniform opened 
the box to reveal a neatly folded banner. This he reverentially 
proffered to Nakano, who would clip it to the rope on the flagpole, 
revealing the bright red circle of the Rising Sun on a field of pure 
white. Then Uniform pressed the switch for the playing of the anthem. 
"May Our Lord's Reign..." 

And up the flag would climb. 

"Until pebbles turn to boulders ..." It would reach halfway up the pole. 
"And be covered with moss." 

 



Now it was at the top. The two stood to attention, rigid, looking up at 
the flag, which was quite a sight on clear days when the wind was 
blowing. 

The lowering of the flag at dusk was carried out with the same 
ceremonial reverence, but in reverse. Down the banner would come 
and find its place in the box. The national flag did not fly at night. 

I didn’t know why the flag had to be taken down at night. The nation 
continued to exist while it was dark, and plenty of people worked all 
night - railway construction crews and taxi drivers and bar hostesses 
and firemen and night watchmen: it seemed unfair to me that such 
people were denied the protection of the flag. Or maybe it didn’t 
matter all that much and nobody really cared - aside from me. Not that 
I really cared, either. It was just something that happened to cross my 
mind. 

The rules for room assignments put first- and second-year students in 
doubles while third- and final-year students had single rooms. Double 
rooms were a little longer and narrower than nine-by-twelve, with an 
aluminium-framed window in the wall opposite the door and two 
desks by the window arranged so the inhabitants of the room could 
study back-to-back. To the left of the door stood a steel bunk bed. The 
furniture supplied was sturdy and simple and included a pair of 
lockers, a small coffee table, and some built-in shelves. Even the most 
well-disposed observer would have had trouble calling this setting 
poetic. The shelves of most rooms carried such items as transistor 
radios, hairdryers, electric carafes and cookers, instant coffee, tea 
bags, sugar cubes, and simple pots and bowls for preparing instant 
ramen. The walls bore pin-ups from girlie magazines or stolen porno 
movie posters. One guy had a photo of pigs mating, but this was a far- 
out exception to the usual naked women, girl pop singers or actresses. 
Bookshelves on the desks held textbooks, dictionaries and novels. 

The filth of these all-male rooms was horrifying. Mouldy mandarin 
skins clung to the bottoms of waste-paper baskets. Empty cans used 

 



for ashtrays held mounds of cigarette butts, and when these started to 
smoulder they'd be doused with coffee or beer and left to give off a 
sour stink. Blackish 

grime and bits of indefinable matter clung to all the bowls and dishes 
on the shelves, and the floors were littered with instant ramen 
wrappers and empty beer cans and discarded lids from one thing or 
another. It never occurred to anyone to sweep up and throw these 
things in the bin. Any wind that blew through would raise clouds of 
dust. Each room had its own horrendous smell, but the components of 
that smell were always the same: sweat, body odour and rubbish. 
Dirty clothes would pile up under the beds, and without anyone 
bothering to air the mattresses on a regular basis, these sweat- 
impregnated pads would give off odours beyond redemption. In 
retrospect, it seems amazing that these shitpiles gave rise to no killer 
epidemics. 

My room, on the other hand, was as sanitary as a morgue. The floor 
and window were spotless, the mattresses were aired each week, all 
pencils stood in the pencil holders, and even the curtains were washed 
once a month. My room-mate was a cleanliness freak. None of the 
others in the dorm believed me when I told them about the curtains. 
They didn't know that curtains could be washed. They believed, 
rather, that curtains were semi-permanent parts of the window. 
"There's something wrong with that guy," they’d say, labelling him a 
Nazi or a storm trooper. 

We didn’t even have pin-ups. No, we had a photo of a canal in 
Amsterdam. I had put up a nude shot, but my room-mate had pulled it 
down. "Hey, Watanabe," he said. "I-I'm not too crazy about this kind 
of thing," and up went the canal photo instead. I wasn't especially 
attached to the nude, so I didn’t protest. 

"What the hell's that?" was the universal reaction to the Amsterdam 
photo whenever any of the other guys came to my room. 

"Oh, Storm Trooper likes to wank looking at this," I said. 

 



I meant it as a joke, but they all took me seriously - so seriously that I 
began to believe it myself. 

Everybody sympathized with me for having Storm Trooper as a room¬ 
mate, but I really wasn't that upset about it. He left me alone as long as 
I kept my area clean, and in fact having him as my room-mate made 
things easier for me in many ways. He did all the cleaning, he took 
care of sunning the mattresses, he threw out the rubbish. He'd give a 
sniff and suggest a bath for me if I’d been too busy to wash for a few 
days. He’d even point out when it was time for me to go to the barber's 
or trim my nasal hair. The one thing that bothered me was the way he 
would spray clouds of insecticide if he noticed a single fly in the 
room, because then I had to take refuge in a neighbouring shitpile. 
Storm Trooper was studying geography at a national university. 

As he told me the first time we met, "I'm studying m-m-maps." 

"You like maps?" I asked. 

"Yup. When I graduate. I’m going to work for the Geographical 
Survey Institute and make m-m-maps." 

I was impressed by the variety of dreams and goals that life could 
offer. This was one of the very first new impressions I received when I 
came to Tokyo for the first time. The thought struck me that society 
needed a few people - just a few - who were interested in and even 
passionate about mapmaking. Odd, though, that someone who wanted 
to work for the government's Geographical Survey Institute should 
stutter every time he said the word "map". Storm Trooper often didn't 
stutter at all, except when he pronounced the word "map", for which it 
was a 100 per cent certainty. 

"W what are you studying?" he asked me. 

"Drama," I said. 

"Gonna put on plays?" 

"Nah, just read scripts and do research. Racine, Ionesco, Shakespeare, 
stuff like that." 

He said he had heard of Shakespeare but not the others. I hardly knew 

 



anything about the others myself. I'd just seen their names in lecture 
handouts. 

"You like plays?" he asked. 

"Not especially." 

This confused him, and when he was confused, his stuttering got 
worse. I felt sorry 1 had done that to him. 

"I could have picked anything," I said. "Ethnology, Asian history. I 
just happened to pick drama, that's all," which was not the most 
convincing explanation 1 could have come up with. 

"I don't get it," he said, looking as if he really didn’t get it. "I like m- 
m-maps, so I decided to come to Tokyo and get my parents to s-send 
me money so I could study m-m-maps. But not you, huh?" 

His approach made more sense than mine. I gave up trying to explain 
myself. Then we drew lots (matchsticks) to choose bunks. He got the 
upper bunk. 

Tall, with a crewcut and high cheekbones, he always wore the same 
outfit: white shirt, black trousers, black shoes, navy-blue jumper. To 
these he would add a uniform jacket and black briefcase when he went 
to his university: a typical right-wing student. Which is why 
everybody called him Storm Trooper. But in fact he was totally 
indifferent to politics. He wore a uniform because he didn’t want to be 
bothered choosing clothes. What interested him were things like 
changes in the coastline or the completion of a new railway tunnel. 
Nothing dse. He'd go on for hours once he got started on a subject 
like that, until you either ran away or fell asleep. 

He was up at six each morning with the strains of "May Our Lord's 
Reign". Which is to say that that ostentatious flag-raising ritual was 
not entirely useless. He'd get dressed, go to the bathroom and wash his 
face - for ever. I sometimes got the feeling he must be taking out each 
tooth and washing it, one at a time. Back in the room, he would snap 
the wrinkles out of his towel and lay it on the radiator to dry, then 
return his toothbrush and soap to the shelf. Finally he'd do radio 

 



callisthenics with the rest of the nation. 

I was used to reading late at night and sleeping until eight o'clock, so 
even when he started shuffling around the room and exercising, I 
remained unconscious - until the part where he started jumping. He 
took his jumping seriously and made the bed bounce every time he hit 
the floor. I stood it for three days because they had told us that 
communal life called for a certain degree of resignation, but by the 
morning of the fourth day, I couldn’t take it any more. 

"Hey, can you do that on the roof or somewhere?" I said. "I can't 
sleep." 

"But it's already 6.30!" he said, open-mouthed. 

"Yeah, I know it's 6.30. I'm still supposed to be asleep. I don't know 
how to explain it exactly, but that's how it works for me." 

"Anyway, I can't do it on the roof. Somebody on the third floor would 
complain. Here, we're over a storeroom." 

"So go out on the quad. On the lawn." 

"That's no good, either. I don't have a transistor radio. I need to plug it 
in. And you can't do radio callisthenics without music." 

True, his radio was an old piece of junk without batteries. Mine was a 
transistor portable, but it was strictly FM, for music. 

"OK, let's compromise," I said. "Do your exercises but cut out the 
jumping part. It's so damned noisy. What do you say?" 

"J-jumping? What's that?" 

"Jumping is jumping. Bouncing up and down." "But there isn't any 
jumping." 

My head was starting to hurt. I was ready to give up, but I wanted to 
make my point. I got out of bed and started bouncing up and down 
and singing the opening melody of NHK's radio callisthenics. "I'm 
talking about this," I said. 

"Oh, that. I guess you're right. I never noticed." 

"See what I mean?" I said, sitting on the edge of the bed. "Just cut out 
that part. I can put up with the rest. Stop jumping and let me sleep." 

 



"But that's impossible," he said matter-of-factly. "I can't leave 
anything out. I've been doing the same thing every day for ten years, 
and once I start I do the whole routine unconsciously. If I left 
something out, I wouldn't be able to do any of it." 

There was nothing more for me to say. What could I have said? The 
quickest way to put a stop to this was to wait for him to leave the 
room and throw his goddamn radio out the goddamn window, but I 
knew if I did that all hell would break loose. Storm Trooper treasured 
everything he owned. He smiled when he saw me sitting on the bed at 
a loss for words, and tried to comfort me. 

"Hey, Watanabe, why don’t you just get up and exercise with me?" 
And he went off to breakfast. 

Naoko chuckled when I told her the story of Storm Trooper and his 
radio callisthenics. I hadn't been trying to amuse her, but I ended up 
laughing myself. Though her smile vanished in an instant, I enjoyed 
seeing it for the first time in a long while. 

We had left the train at Yotsuya and were walking along the 
embankment by the station. It was a Sunday afternoon in the middle 
of May. The brief on-and-off showers of the morning had cleared up 
before noon, and a south wind had swept away the low-hanging 
clouds. The brilliant green leaves of the cherry trees stirred in the air, 
splashing sunlight in all directions. This was an early summer day. 
The people we passed carried their jumpers or jackets over their 
shoulders or in their arms. Everyone looked happy in the warm 
Sunday afternoon sun. The young men playing tennis in the courts 
beyond the embankment had stripped down to their shorts. Only 
where two nuns in winter habits sat talking on a bench did the summer 
light seem not to reach, though both wore looks of satisfaction as they 
enjoyed chatting in the sun. 

Fifteen minutes of walking and I was sweaty enough to take off my 
thick cotton shirt and go with a T-shirt. Naoko had rolled the sleeves 

 



of her light grey sweatshirt up to her elbows. It was nicely faded, 
obviously having been washed many times. I felt as if I had seen her 
in that shirt long before. This was just a feeling I had, not a clear 
memory. I didn't have that much to remember about Naoko at the 
time. 

"How do you like communal living?" she asked. "Is it fun to live with 
a lot of other people?" 

"I don’t know. I’ve only been doing it a month or so. It’s not that bad, I 
can stand it." 

She stopped at a fountain and took a sip, wiping her mouth with a 
white handkerchief she took from her trouser pocket. Then she bent 
over and carefully retied her laces. 

"Do you think I could do it?" 

"What? Living in a dorm?" 

"Uh-huh." 

"I suppose it’s all a matter of attitude. You could let a lot of things 
bother you if you wanted to - the rules, the idiots who think they're hot 
shit, the room-mates doing radio callisthenics at 6.30 in the morning. 
But it's pretty much the same anywhere you go, you can manage." 

"I guess so," she said with a nod. She seemed to be turning something 
over in her mind. Then she looked straight into my eyes as if peering 
at some unusual object. Now I saw that her eyes were so deep and 
clear they made my heart thump. I realized that I had never had 
occasion to look into her eyes like this. It was the first time the two of 
us had ever gone walking together or talked at such length. 

"Are you thinking about living in a dorm or something?" I asked. 
"Uh-uh," she said. "I was just wondering what communal life would 
be like. And. .." She seemed to be trying - and failing - to find exactly 
the right word or expression. Then she sighed and looked down. "Oh, 
I don't know. Never mind." 

That was the end of the conversation. She continued walking east, and 
I followed just behind. 

 



Almost a year had gone by since I had last seen Naoko, and in that 
time she had lost so much weight as to look like a different person. 
The plump cheeks that had been a special feature of hers were all but 
gone, and her neck had become delicate and slender. Not that she was 
bony now or unhealthy looking: there was something natural and 
serene about the way she had slimmed down, as if she had been hiding 
in some long, narrow space until she herself had become long and 
narrow. And a lot prettier than I remembered. I wanted to tell her that, 
but couldn't find a good way to put it. 

We had not planned to meet but had run into each other on the Chuo 
commuter line. She had decided to see a film by herself, and I was 
headed for the bookshops in Kanda - nothing urgent in either case. 
She had suggested that we leave the train, which we happened to do in 
Yotsuya, where the green embankment makes for a nice place to walk 
by the old castle moat. Alone together, we had nothing in particular to 
talk about, and I wasn't quite sure why Naoko had suggested we get 
off the train. We had never really had much to say to each other. 

Naoko started walking the minute we hit the street, and I hurried after 
her, keeping a few paces behind. I could have closed the distance 
between us, but something held me back. I walked with my eyes on 
her shoulders and her straight black hair. She wore a big, brown 
hairslide, and when she turned her head I caught a glimpse of a small, 
white ear. Now and then she would look back and say something. 
Sometimes it would be a remark I might have responded to, and some¬ 
times it would be something to which I had no idea how to reply. 
Other times, I simply couldn’t hear what she was saying. She didn't 
seem to care one way or another. Once she had finished saying 
whatever she wanted to say, she’d face front again and keep on 
walking. Oh, well, I told myself, it was a nice day for a stroll. 

This was no mere stroll for Naoko, though, judging from that walk. 
She turned right at Lidabashi, came out at the moat, crossed the 
intersection at Jinbocho, climbed the hill at Ochanomizu and came out 

 



at Hongo. From there she followed the tram tracks to Komagome. It 
was a challenging route. By the time we reached Komagome, the sun 
was sinking and the day had become a soft spring evening. 

"Where are we?" asked Naoko, as if noticing our surroundings for the 
first time. 

"Komagome," I said. "Didn’t you know? We made this big arc." 

"Why did we come here?" 

"You brought us here. I was just following you." 

We went to a shop by the station for a bowl of noodles. Thirsty, I had 
a whole beer to myself. Neither of us said a word from the time we 
gave our order to the time we finished eating. I was exhausted from all 
that walking, and she just sat there with her hands on the table, 
mulling something over again. All the leisure spots were crowded on 
this warm Sunday, they were saying on the TV news. And we just 
walked from Yotsuya to Komagome, I said to myself. 

"Well, you're in good shape," I said when I had finished my noodles. 
"Surprised?" 

"Yeah." 

"I was a long distance runner at school, I'll have you know. I used to 
do the 10,000 metres. And my father took me mountain climbing on 
Sundays ever since I can remember. You know our house - right there, 
next to the mountain. I've always had strong legs." 

"It doesn't show," I said. 

"I know," she answered. "Everybody thinks I'm this delicate little girl. 
But you can't judge a book by its cover." To which she added a 
momentary smile. 

"And that goes for me, too," I said. "I'm worn out." 

"Oh, I'm sorry. I've been dragging you around all day." "Still, I'm glad 
we had a chance to talk. We've never done that before, just the two of 
us," I said, trying without success to recall what we had talked about. 
She was playing with the ashtray on the table. 

"I wonder. .." she began, ". . . if you wouldn’t mind ... I mean, if it 

 



really wouldn't be any bother to you ... Do you think we could see 
each other again? I know I don’t have any right to be asking you this." 
"Any right? What do you mean by that?" 

She blushed. My reaction t> her request might have been a little too 
strong. 

"I don't know ... I can’t really explain it," she said, tugging the sleeves 
of her sweatshirt up over the elbows and down again. The soft hair on 
her arms shone a lovely golden colour in the lights of the shop. "I 
didn't mean to say "right’ exactly. I was looking for another way to put 
it." 

Elbows on the table, she stared at the calendar on the wall, almost as 
though she were hoping to find the proper expression there. Failing, 
she sighed and closed her eyes and played with her hairslide. 

"Never mind," I said. "I think I know what you're getting at. I'm not 
sure how to put it, either." 

"I can never say what I want to say," continued Naoko. "It's been like 
this for a while now. I try to say something, but all I get are the wrong 
words - the wrong words or the exact opposite words from what I 
mean. I try to correct myself, and that only makes it worse. I lose track 
of what I was trying to say to begin with. It's like I'm split in two and 
playing tag with myself. One half is chasing the other half around this 
big, fat post. The other me has the right words, but this me can't catch 
her." She raised her face and looked into my eyes. "Does this make 
any sense to you?" 

"Everybody feels like that to some extent," I said. "They're trying to 
express themselves and it bothers t can't get it right." 

Naoko looked disappointed with my answer. "No, that’s not it either," 
she said without further explanation 

"Anyway, I’d be glad to see you again," I said. "I'm always free on 
Sundays, and walking would be good for me." 

We boarded the Yamanote Line, and Naoko transferred to the Chuo 
Line at Shinjuku. She was living in a tiny flat way out in the western 

 



suburb of Kokubunji. 

"Tell me," she said as we parted. "Has anything changed about the 
way I talk?" 

"I think so," I said, "but I'm not sure what. Tell you the truth, I know I 
saw you a lot back then, but I don’t remember talking to you much." 
"That's true," she said. "Anyway, can I call you on Saturday?" 

"Sure. I'll be expecting to hear from you." 

I first met Naoko when I was in the sixth-form at school. She was also 
in the sixth-form at a posh girls' school run by one of the Christian 
missions. The school was so refined you were considered unrefined if 
you studied too much. Naoko was the girlfriend of my best (and only) 
friend. Kizuki. The two of them had been close almost from birth, 
their houses not 200 yards apart. 

As with most couples who have been together since childhood, there 
was a casual openness about the relationship of Kizuki and Naoko and 
little sense that they wanted to be alone together. They were always 
visiting each other's homes and eating or playing mah-jong with each 
other's families. I double-dated with them any number of times. Naoko 
would bring a school friend for me and the four of us would go to the 
zoo or the pool or the cinema. The girls she brought were always 
pretty, but a little too refined for my taste. I got along better with the 
somewhat cruder girls from my own State school who were easier to 
talk to. I could never tell what was going on inside the pretty heads of 
the girls that Naoko brought along, and they probably couldn’t 
understand me, either. 

After a while, Kizuki gave up trying to arrange dates for me, and 
instead the three of us would do things together. Kizuki and Naoko 
and I: odd, but that was the most comfortable combination. 
Introducing a fourth person into the mix would always make things a 
little awkward. We were like a TV talk show, with me the guest, 
Kizuki the talented host, and Naoko his assistant. He was good at 

 



occupying that central position. True, he had a sarcastic side that often 
struck people as arrogant, but in fact he was a considerate and fair- 
minded person. He would distribute his remarks and jokes fairly to 
Naoko and to me, taking care to see that neither of us felt left out. If 
one or the other stayed quiet too long, he would steer his conversation 
in that direction and get the person to talk. It probably looked harder 
than it was: he knew how to monitor and adjust the air around him on 
a second-by-second basis. In addition, he had a rare talent for finding 
the interesting parts of someone's generally uninteresting comments so 
that, while speaking to him, you felt you were an exceptionally 
interesting person with an exceptionally interesting life. 

And yet he was not the least bit sociable. I was his only real friend at 
school. I could never understand why such a smart and capable talker 
did not turn his talents to the broader world around him but remained 
satisfied to concentrate on our little trio. Nor could I understand why 
he picked me to be his friend. I was just an ordinary kid who liked to 
read books and listen to music and didn't stand out in any way that 
would prompt someone like Kizuki to pay attention to me. We hit it 
off straight away, though. His father was a dentist, known for his 
professional skill and his high fees. 

"Want to double-date Sunday?" he asked me just after we met. "My 
girlfriend goes to a girls' school, and she'll bring along a cute one for 
you." 

"Sure," I said, and that was how I met Naoko. 

The three of us spent a lot of time together, but whenever Kizuki left 
the room, Naoko and I had trouble talking to each other. We never 
knew what to talk about. And in fact there was no topic of 
conversation that we had in common. Instead of talking, we'd drink 
water or toy with something on the table and wait for Kizuki to come 
back and start up the conversation again. Naoko was not particularly 
talkative, and I was more of a listener than a talker, so I felt 

 



uncomfortable when I was left alone with her. Not that we were 
incompatible: we just had nothing to talk about. 

Naoko and I saw each other only once after Kizuki's funeral. Two 
weeks after the event, we met at a cafe to take care of some minor 
matter, and when that was finished we had nothing more to say. I tried 
raising several different topics, but none of them led anywhere. And 
when Naoko did talk, there was an edge to her voice. She seemed 
angry with me, but I had no idea why. We never saw each other again 
until that day a year later we happened to meet on the Chuo Line in 
Tokyo. 

Naoko might have been angry with me because I, not she, had been 
the last one to see Kizuki. That may not be the best way to put it, but I 
more or less understood how she felt. I would have swapped places 
with her if I could have, but finally, what had happened had happened, 
and there was nothing I could do about it. 

It had been a nice afternoon in May. After lunch, Kizuki suggested we 
skip classes and go play pool or something. I had no special interest in 
my afternoon classes, so together we left school, ambled down the hill 
to a pool hall on the harbour, and played four games. When I won the 
first, easy-going game, he became serious and won the next three. 
This meant I paid, according to our custom. Kizuki didn't make a 
single joke as we played, which was most unusual. We smoked 
afterwards. 

"Why so serious?" I asked. 

"I didn’t want to lose today," said Kizuki with a satisfied smile. 

He died that night in his garage. He led a rubber hose from the exhaust 
pipe of his N-360 to a window, taped over the gap in the window, and 
revved the engine. I have no idea how long it took him to die. His 
parents had been out visiting a sick relative, and when they opened the 
garage to put their car away, he was already dead. His radio was 
going, and a petrol station receipt was tucked under the windscreen 

 



wiper. 

Kizuki had left no suicide note, and had no motive that anyone could 
think of. Because I had been the last one to see him, I was called in for 
questioning by the police. I told the investigating officer that Kizuki 
had given no indication of what he was about to do, that he had been 
exactly the same as always. The policeman had obviously formed a 
poor impression of both Kizuki and me, as if it was perfectly natural 
for the kind of person who would skip classes and play pool to 
commit suicide. A small article in the paper brought the affair to a 
close. Kizuki's parents got rid of his red N-360. For a time, a white 
flower marked his school desk. 

In the ten months between Kizuki's death and my exams, I was unable 
to find a place for myself in the world around me. I started sleeping 
with one of the girls at school, but that didn’t last six months. Nothing 
about her really got to me. I applied to a private university in Tokyo, 
the kind of place with an entrance exam for which I wouldn’t have to 
study much, and I passed without exhilaration. The girl asked me not 
to go to Tokyo - "It's 500 miles from here!" she pleaded - but I had to 
get away from Kobe at any cost. I wanted to begin a new life where I 
didn’t know a soul. 

"You don't give a damn about me any more, now that you've slept 
with me," she said, crying. 

"That's not true," I insisted. "I just need to get away from this town." 
But she was not prepared to understand me. And so we parted. 
Thinking about all the things that made her so much nicer than the 
other girls at home, I sat on the bullet train to Tokyo feeling terrible 
about what I'd done, but there was no way to undo it. I would try to 
forget her. 

There was only one thing for me to do when I started my new life in 
the dorm: stop taking everything so seriously; establish a proper 
distance between myself and everything else. Forget about green baize 
pool tables and red N-360s and white flowers on school desks; about 

 



smoke rising from tall crematorium chimneys, and chunky 
paperweights in police interrogation rooms. It seemed to work at first. 
I tried hard to forget, but there remained inside me a vague knot of air. 
And as time went by, the knot began to take on a clear and simple 
form, a form that I am able to put into words, like this: 

Death exists, not as the opposite but as a part of life. 

It's a cliche translated into words, but at the time I felt it not as words 
but as that knot of air inside me. Death exists - in a paperweight, in 
four red and white balls on a pool table - and we go on living and 
breathing it into our lungs like fine dust. 

Until that time, I had understood death as something entirely separate 
from and independent of life. The hand of death is bound to take us, I 
had felt, but until the day it reaches out for us, it leaves us alone. This 
had seemed to me the simple, logical truth. Life is here, death is over 
there. I am here, not over there. 

The night Kizuki died, however, I lost the ability to see death (and 
life) in such simple terms. Death was not the opposite of life. It was 
already here, within my being, it had 

always been here, and no struggle would permit me to forget that. 
When it took the 17-year-old Kizuki that night in May, death took me 
as well. 

I lived through the following spring, at 18, with that knot of air in my 
chest, but I straggled all the while against becoming serious. 
Becoming serious was not the same thing as approaching the truth, I 
sensed, however vaguely. But death was a fact, a serious fact, no 
matter how you looked at it. Stuck inside this suffocating 
contradiction, I went on endlessly spinning in circles. Those were 
strange days, now that I look back at them. In the midst of life, 
everything revolved around death. 

 



Naoko called me the following Saturday, and that Sunday we had a 
date. I suppose I can call it a date. I can't think of a better word for it. 

As before, we walked the streets. We stopped somewhere 
for coffee, walked some more, had dinner in the evening, and 
said goodbye. Again, she talked only in snatches, but this didn't seem 
to bother her, and I made no special effort to keep the conversation 
going. We talked about whatever came to mind - our daily routines, 
our colleges; each a little fragment that led nowhere. We said nothing 
at all about the past. And mainly, we walked - and walked, and 
walked. Fortunately, Tokyo is such a big city we could never have 
covered it all. 

We kept on walking like this almost every weekend. She would lead, 
and I would follow close behind. Naoko had a variety of hairslides 
and always wore them with her right ear exposed. I remember her 
most clearly this way, from the back. She would toy with her hairslide 
whenever she felt embarrassed by something. And she was always 
dabbing at her mouth with a handkerchief. She did this whenever she 
had something to say. The more I observed these habits of hers, the 
more I came to like her. 

Naoko went to a girls' college on the rural western edge of Tokyo, a 
nice little place famous for its teaching of English. 

Nearby was a narrow irrigation canal with clean, clear water, and 
Naoko and I would often walk along its banks. Sometimes she would 
invite me up to her flat and cook for me. It never seemed to concern 
her that the two of us were in such close quarters together. The room 
was small and neat and so lacking in frills that only the stockings 
drying in the comer by the window gave any hint that a girl lived 

 



there. She led a spare, simple life with hardly any friends. No one who 
had known her at school could have imagined her like this. Back then, 
she had dressed with real flair and surrounded herself with a million 
friends. When I saw her room, I realized that, like me, she had wanted 
to go away to college and begin a new life far from anyone she knew. 
"Know why I chose this place?" she said with a smile. "Because 
nobody from home was coming here. We were all supposed to go 
somewhere more chic. You know what I mean?" 

My relationship with Naoko was not without its progress, though. 
Little by little, she grew more accustomed to me, and I to her. When 
the summer holidays ended and a new term started, Naoko began 
walking next to me as if it were the most natural thing in the world to 
do. She saw me as a friend now, I concluded, and walking side by side 
with such a beautiful girl was by no means painful for me. We kept 
walking all over Tokyo in the same meandering way, climbing hills, 
crossing rivers and railway lines, just walking and walking with no 
destination in mind. We forged straight ahead, as if our walking were 
a religious ritual meant to heal our wounded spirits. If it rained, we 
used umbrellas, but in any case we walked. 

Then came autumn, and the dormitory grounds were buried in zelkova 
leaves. The fragrance of a new season arrived when I put on my first 
pullover. Having worn out one pair of shoes, I bought some new suede 
ones. 

I can't seem to recall what we talked about then. Nothing special, I 
expect. We continued to avoid any mention of the past and rarely 
spoke about Kizuki. We could face each other over coffee cups in 
total silence. 

Naoko liked to hear me tell stories about Storm Trooper. Once he had 
a date with a fellow student (a girl in geography, of course) but came 
back in the early evening looking glum. "Tell me, W W-Watanabe, 
what do you talk about with g-g-girls?" I don't remember how I 
answered him, but he had picked the wrong person to ask. In July, 

 



somebody in the dorm had taken down Storm Trooper's Amsterdam 
canal scene and put up a photo of the Golden Gate Bridge instead. He 
told me he wanted to know if Storm Trooper could masturbate to the 
Golden Gate Bridge. "He loved it," I reported later, which prompted 
someone else to put up a picture of an iceberg. Each time the photo 
changed in his absence. Storm Trooper became upset. 

"Who-who-who the hell is doing this?" he asked. 

"I wonder," I said. "But what's the difference? They're all nice 
pictures. You should be grateful." 

"Yeah, I s’pose so, but it’s weird." 

My stories of Storm Trooper always made Naoko laugh. Not many 
things succeeded in doing that, so I talked about him often, though I 
was not exactly proud of myself for using him this way. He just 
happened to be the youngest son in a not-too-wealthy family who had 
grown up a little too serious for his own good. Making maps was the 
one small dream of his one small life. Who had the right to make fun 
of him for that? 

By then, however, Storm-Trooper jokes had become an indispensable 
source of dormitory talk, and there was no way for me to undo what I 
had done. Besides, the sight of Naoko’s smiling face had become my 
own special source of pleasure. I went on supplying everyone with 
new stories. 

Naoko asked me one time - just once - if I had a girl I liked. I told her 
about the one I had left behind in Kobe. "She was nice," I said. "I 
enjoyed sleeping with her, and I miss her every now and then, but 
finally, she didn’t move me. I don't know, sometimes I think I’ve got 
this hard kernel in my heart, and nothing much can get inside it. I 
doubt if I can really love anybody." 

"Have you ever been in love?" Naoko asked. 

"Never," I said. 

She didn't ask me more than that. 

When autumn ended and cold winds began tearing through the city. 

 



Naoko would often walk pressed against my arm. I could sense her 
breathing through the thick cloth of her duffel coat. She would 
entwine her arm with mine, or cram her hand in my pocket, or, when 
it was really cold, cling tightly to my arm, shivering. None of this had 
any special meaning. I just kept walking with my hands shoved in my 
pockets. Our rubber-soled shoes made hardly any sound on the 
pavement, except for the dry crackling when we trod on the broad, 
withered sycamore leaves. I felt sorry for Naoko whenever I heard that 
sound. My arm was not the one she needed, but the arm of someone 
else. My warmth was not what she needed, but the warmth of 
someone else. I felt almost guilty being me. 

As the winter deepened, the transparent clarity of Naoko's eyes 
seemed to increase. It was a clarity that had nowhere to go. Sometimes 
Naoko would lock ter eyes on to mine for no apparent reason. She 
seemed to be searching for something, and this would give me a 
strange, lonely, helpless sort of feeling. 

I wondered if she was trying to convey something to me, something 
she could not put into words - something prior to words that she could 
not grasp within herself and which therefore had no hope of ever 
turning into words. Instead, she would fiddle with her hairslide, dab at 
the comers of her mouth with a handkerchief, or look into my eyes in 
that meaningless way. I wanted to hold her tight when she did these 
things, but I would hesitate and hold back. I was afraid I might hurt 
her. And so the two of us kept walking the streets of Tokyo, Naoko 
searching for words in space. 

The guys in the dorm would always ease me when I got a call from 
Naoko or went out on a Sunday morning. They assumed, naturally 
enough, that I had found a girlfriend. There was no way to explain the 
truth to them, and no need to explain it, so I let them think what they 
wanted to. I had to face a barrage of stupid questions in the evening - 
what position had we used? What was she like down there? What 
colour underwear had she been wearing that day? I gave them the 

 



answers they wanted. 

And so I went from 18 to 19. Each day the sun would rise and set, the 
flag would be raised and lowered. Every Sunday I would have a date 
with my dead friend's girl. I had no idea what I was doing or what I 
was going to do. For my courses I would read Claudel and Racine and 
Eisenstein. but they meant almost nothing to me. I made no friends at 
the lectures, and hardly knew anyone in the dorm. The others in the 
dorm thought I wanted to be a writer because I was always alone with 
a book, but I had no such ambition. There was nothing I wanted to be. 

I tried to talk 4>out this feeling with Naoko. She, at least, would be 
able to understand what I was feeling with some degree of precision, I 
thought. But I could never find the words to express myself. Strange, I 
seemed to have caught her word-searching sickness. 

On Saturday nights I would sit by the phone in the lobby, waiting for 
Naoko to call. Most of the others were out, so the lobby was usually 
deserted. I would stare at the grains of light suspended in that silent 
space, struggling to see into my own heart. What did I want? And 
what did others want from me? But I could never find the answers. 
Sometimes I would reach out and try to grasp the grains of light, but 
my fingers touched nothing. 

I read a lot, but not a lot of different books: I like to read my 
favourites again and again. Back then it was Truman Capote, John 
Updike, F. Scott Fitzgerald. Raymond Chandler, but I didn’t see 
anyone else in my lectures or the dorm reading writers like that. They 
liked Kazumi Takahashi, Kenzaburo Oe, Yukio Mishima, or 
contemporary French novelists, which was another reason I didn’t 
have much to say to anybody but kept to myself and my books. With 
my eyes closed, I would touch a familiar book and draw its fragrance 
deep inside me. This was enough to make me happy. 

At 18 my favourite book was John Updike's The Centaur, but after I 
had read it a number of times, it began to lose some of its initial lustre 

 



and yielded first place to The Great Gatsby. Gatsby stayed in first 
place for a long time after that. I would pull it off the shelf when the 
mood hit me and read a section at random. It never once disappointed 
me. There wasn't a boring page in the whole book. I wanted to tell 
people what a wonderful novel it was, but no one around me had read 
The Great Gatsby or was likely to. Urging others to read F Scott 
Fitzgerald, although not a reactionary act, was not something one 
could do in 1968. 

When I did finally meet the one person in my world who had read 
Gatsby, he and I became friends because of it. His name was 
Nagasawa. He was two years older than me, and because he was doing 
legal studies at the prestigious Tokyo University, he was on the fast 
track to national leadership. We lived in the same dorm and knew 
each other only by sight, until one day when I was reading Gatsby in a 
sunny spot in the dining hall. He sat down next to me and asked what I 
was reading. When I told him, he asked if I was enjoying it. "This is 
my third time," I said, "and every time I find something new that I like 
even more than the last." 

"This man says he has read The Great Gatsby three times," he said as 
if to himself. "Well, any friend of Gatsby is a friend of mine." 

And so we became friends. This happened in October. 

The better I got to know Nagasawa, the stranger he seemed. I had met 
a lot of weird people in my day, but none as strange as Nagasawa. He 
was a far more voracious reader than me, but he made it a rule never 
to touch a book by any author who had not been dead at least 30 years. 
"That's the only kind of book I can trust," he said. 

"It's not that I don’t believe in contemporary literature," he added, "but 
I don't want to waste valuable time reading any book that has not had 
the baptism of time. Life is too short." 

"What kind of authors do you like?" I asked, speaking in respectful 
tones to this man two years my senior. 

"Balzac, Dante, Joseph Conrad, Dickens," he answered without 

 



hesitation. 

"Not exactly fashionable." 

"That's why I read them. If you only read the books that everyone else 
is reading, you can only think what everyone else is thinking. That's 
the world of hicks and slobs. Real people would be ashamed of 
themselves doing that. Haven't you noticed, Watanabe? You and I are 
the only real ones in this dorm. The other guys are crap." 

This took me off guard. "How can you say that?" 

"'Cause it's true. I know. I can see it. It's like we have marks on our 
foreheads. And besides, we've both read The Great Gatsby." 

I did some quick calculating. "But Fitzgerald's only been dead 28 
years," I said. 

"So what? Two years? Fitzgerald's advanced." 

No one else in the dorm knew that Nagasawa was a secret reader of 
classic novels, nor would it have mattered if they had. Nagasawa was 
known for being smart. He breezed into Tokyo University, he got 
good marks, he would take the Civil Service Exam, join the Foreign 
Ministry, and become a diplomat. He came from a wealthy family. His 
father owned a big hospital in Nagoya, and his brother had also 
graduated from Tokyo, gone on to medical school, and would one day 
inherit the hospital. Nagasawa always had plenty of money in his 
pocket, and he carried himself with real dignity. People treated him 
with respect, even the dorm Head. When he asked someone to do 
something, the person would do it without protest. There was no 
choice in the matter. 

Nagasawa had a certain inborn quality that drew people to him and 
made them follow him. He knew how to stand at the head of the pack, 
to assess the situation, to give precise and tactful instructions that 
others would obey. Above his head hung an aura that revealed his 
powers like an angel's halo, the mere sight of which would inspire awe 
in people for this superior being. Which is why it shocked everyone 

 



that Nagasawa chose me, a person with no distinctive qualities, to be 
his special friend. People I hardly knew treated me with a certain 
respect because of it, but what they did not seem to realize was that 
the reason for my having been chosen was a simple one, namely that I 
treated Nagasawa with none of the adulation he received from other 
people. I had a definite interest in the strange, complex aspects of his 
nature, but none of those other things - his good marks, his aura, his 
looks - impressed me. This must have been something new for him. 
There were sides to Nagasawa's personality that conflicted in the 
extreme. Even I would be moved by his kindness at times, but he 
could just as well be malicious and cruel. He was both a spirit of 
amazing loftiness and an irredeemable man of the gutter. He could 
charge forward, the optimistic leader, even as his heart writhed in a 
swamp of loneliness. I saw these paradoxical qualities of his from the 
start, and I could never understand why they weren't just as obvious to 
everyone else. He lived in his own special hell. 

Still, I think I always managed to view him in the most favourable 
light. His greatest virtue was his honesty. Not only would he never lie, 
he would always acknowledge his shortcomings. He never tried to 
hide things that might embarrass him. And where I was concerned, he 
was unfailingly kind and supportive. Had he not been, my life in the 
dorm would have been far more unpleasant than it was. Still, I never 
once opened my heart to him, and in that sense my relationship with 
Nagasawa stood in stark contrast to me and Kizuki. The first time I 
saw Nagasawa drunk and tormenting a girl, I promised myself never, 
under any circumstances, to open myself up to him. 

There were several "Nagasawa Legends" that circulated throughout 
the dorm. According to one, he supposedly once ate three slugs. 
Another gave him a huge penis and had him sleeping with more than  girls. 

The slug story was true. He told me so himself. "Three big mothers," 

 



he said. "Swallowed 'em whole." 

"What the hell for?" 

"Well, it happened the first year I came to live here," he said. "There 
was some shit between the first-years and the third-years. Started in 
April and finally came to a head in September. As first-year 
representative I went to work things out with the third-years. Real 
right-wing arseholes. They had these wooden kendo swords, and 
"working things out' was probably the last thing they wanted to do. So 
I said. 'All right, let’s put an end to this. Do what you want to me, but 
leave the other guys alone.’ So they said. "OK. let’s see you swallow a 
couple of slugs.’ "Fine, 1 1 said, "Let’s have ’em.' The bastards went out 
and got three huge slugs. And I swallowed ’em." 

"What was it like?" 

"What was it like?’ You have to swallow one yourself. The way it 
slides down your throat and into your stomach ... it’s cold, and it 
leaves this disgusting aftertaste ... yuck, I get chills just thinking about 
it. I wanted to puke but I fought it. 

I mean, if I had puked ’em up, I would have had to swallow 
’em all over again. So I kept ’em down. All three of ’em." 

"Then what happened?" 

"I went back to my room and drank a bucket of salt water. 

What else could I do?" 

"Yeah, I guess so." 

"But after that, nobody could say a thing to me. Not even 

the third-years. I’m the only guy in this place who can swallow three 

slugs." 

"I bet you are." 

Finding out about his penis size was easy enough. I just went to the 
dorm's communal shower with him. Fie had a big one, all right. But  girls was probably an exaggeration. "Maybe 75," he said. "I can't 
remember them all, but I'm sure it’s at least 70." When I told him I had 

 



slept with only one, he said. "Oh, we can fix that, easy. Come with me 
next time. I'll get you one easy as that." 

I didn’t believe him, but he turned out to be right. It was easy. Almost 
too easy, with all the excitement of flat beer. We went to some kind of 
bar in Shibuya or Shinjuku (he had Hs favourites), found a pair of 
girls (the world was full of pairs of girls), talked to them, drank, went 
to a hotel, and had sex with them. He was a great talker. Not that he 
had anything great to say, but girls would get carried away listening to 
him, they'd drink too much and end up sleeping with him. I guess they 
enjoyed being with somebody so nice and handsome and clever. And 
the most amazing thing was that, just because I was with him, I 
seemed to become equally fascinating to them. Nagasawa would urge 
me to talk, and girls would respond to me with the same smiles of 
admiration they offered him. He worked his magic, a real talent he had 
that impressed me every time. Compared with Nagasawa, Kizuki's 
conversational gifts were child's play. This was a completely different 
level of accomplishment. As much as I found myself caught up in 
Nagasawa's power, though, I still missed Kizuki. I felt a new 
admiration for his sincerity. Whatever talents he had he would share 
with Naoko and me alone, while Nagasawa was bent on disseminating 
his considerable gifts to all around him. Not that he was dying to sleep 
with the girls he found: it was just a game to him. 


I was not too crazy about sleeping with girls I didn’t know. It was an 
easy way to take care of my sex drive of course, and I did enjoy all the 
holding and touching, but I hated the morning after. I'd wake up and 
find this strange girl sleeping next to me, and the room would reek of 
alcohol, and the bed and the lighting and the curtains had that special 
"love hotel" garishness, and my head would be in a hungover fog. 
Then the girl would wake up and start groping around for her knickers 

 



and while she was putting on her stockings she'd say something like, 
"I hope you used one last night. It’s the worst day of the month for 
me." Then she’d sit in front of a mirror and start grumbling about her 
aching head or her uncooperative make-up while she redid her lipstick 
or attached her false eyelashes. I would have preferred not to spend 
the whole night with them, but you can’t worry about a midnight 
curfew while you're seducing women (which runs counter to the laws 
of physics anyway), so I’d go out with an overnight pass. This meant I 
had to stay put until morning and go back to the dorm filled with self- 
loathing and disillusionment, sunlight stabbing my eyes, mouth coated 
with sand, head belonging to someone else. 

When I had slept with three or four girls this way, I asked Nagasawa, 
"After you've done this 70 times, doesn't it begin to seem kind of 
pointless?" 

"That proves you're a decent human being," he said. "Congratulations. 
There is absolutely nothing to be gained from sleeping with one 
strange woman after another. It just tires you out and makes you 
disgusted with yourself. It's the same for me." 

"So why the hell do you keep it up?" 

"Hard to say. Hey, you know that thing Dostoevsky wrote on 
gambling? It's like that. When you're surrounded by endless 
possibilities, one of the hardest things you can do is pass them up. See 
what I mean?" 

"Sort of." 

"Look. The sun goes down. The girls come out and drink. They 
wander around, looking for something. I can give them that 
something. It's the easiest thing in the world, like drinking water from 
a tap. Before you know it. I've got 'em down. It's what they expect. 
That's what I mean by possibility. It's all around you. How can you 
ignore it? You have a certain ability and the opportunity to use it: can 
you keep your mouth shut and let it pass?" 

"I don’t know. I've never been in a situation like that," I said with a 

 



smile. "I can't imagine what it's like." 

"Count your blessings," Nagasawa said. 

His womanizing was the reason Nagasawa lived in a dorm despite his 
affluent background. Worried that Nagasawa would do nothing else if 
allowed to live alone in Tokyo, his father had compelled him to live 
all four years at university in the donnitory. Not that it mattered much 
to Nagasawa. He was not going to let a few rules bother him. 
Whenever he felt like it, he would get an overnight permission and go 
girl-hunting or spend the night at his girlfriend's flat. These 
permissions were not easy to get, but for him they were like free 
passes - and for me, too, as long as he did the asking. 

Nagasawa did have a steady girlfriend, one he’d been going out with 
since his first year. Her name was Hatsumi, and she was the same age 
as Nagasawa. I had met her a few times and found her to be very nice. 
She didn't have the kind of looks that immediately attracted attention, 
and in fact she was so ordinary that when I first met her I had to 
wonder why Nagasawa couldn't do better, but anyone who talked to 
her took an immediate liking to her. Quiet, intelligent, funny, caring, 
she always dressed with immaculate good taste. I liked her a lot and 
knew that if I could have a girlfriend like Hatsumi, I wouldn't be 
sleeping around with a bunch of easy marks. She liked me, too, and 
tried hard to fix me up with a first-year in her club so we could 
double-date, but I would make up excuses to keep from repeating past 
mistakes. Hatsumi went to the absolute top girls' college in the 
country, and there was no way I was going to be able to talk to one of 
those super-rich princesses. 

Hatsumi had a pretty good idea that Nagasawa was sleeping around, 
but she never complained to him. She was seriously in love, but she 
never made demands. 

"I don't deserve a girl like Hatsumi," Nagasawa once said to me. I had 
to agree with him. 

 



That winter I found a part-time job in a little record shop in Shinjuku. 
It didn’t pay much, but the work was easy - just watching the place 
three nights a week - and they let me buy records cheap. For 
Christmas I bought Naoko a Henry Mancini album with a track of her 
favourite "Dear Heart". I wrapped it myself and added a bright red 
ribbon. She gave me a pair of woollen gloves she had knitted. The 
thumbs were a little short, but they did keep my hands warm. 

"Oh, I'm sorry,” she said, blushing, "What a bad job!" 

"Don't worry, they fit fine," I said, holding my gloved hands out to 
her. 

"Well, at least you won't have to shove your hands in your pockets, I 
guess." 

Naoko didn’t go home to Kobe for the winter break. I stayed in Tokyo, 
too, working in the record shop right up to the end of the year. I didn't 
have anything especially fun to do in Kobe or anyone I wanted to see. 
The dorm's dining hall was closed for the holiday, so I went to 
Naoko's flat for meals. On New Year's Eve we had rice cakes and 
soup like everybody else. 

A lot happened in late January and February that year, 1969. 

At the end of January, Storm Trooper went to bed with a raging fever. 
Which meant I had to stand up Naoko that day. I had gone to a lot of 
trouble to get my hands on some free tickets for a concert. She had 
been especially eager to go because the orchestra was performing one 
of her favourites: Brahms' Fourth Symphony. But with Storm Trooper 
tossing around in bed on the verge of what looked like an agonizing 
death, I couldn’t just leave him, and I couldn’t find anyone stupid 
enough to nurse him in my place. I bought some ice and used several 
layers of plastic bags to hold it on his forehead, wiped his sweating 
brow with cold towels, took his temperature every hour, and even 
changed his vest for him. The fever stayed high for a day, but the 
following morning he jumped out of bed and started exercising as 
though nothing had happened. His temperature was completely 

 



normal. It was hard to believe he was a human being. 

"Weird," said Storm Trooper. "I've never mn a fever in my life." It 
was almost as if he were blaming me. 

This made me mad. "But you did have a fever," I insisted, showing 
him the two wasted tickets. 

"Good thing they were free," he said. I wanted to grab his radio and 
throw it out of the window, but instead I went back to bed with a 
headache. 

It snowed several times in February. 

Near the end of the month I got into a stupid fight with one of the 
third-years on my floor and punched him. He hit his head against the 
concrete wall, but he wasn't badly injured, and Nagasawa straightened 
things out for me. Still, I was called into the dorm Head's office and 
given a warning, after which I grew increasingly uncomfortable living 
in the dormitory. 

The academic year ended in March, but I came up a few credits short. 
My exam results were mediocre - mostly "C"s and "D"s with a few 
"B"s. Naoko had all the grades she needed to begin the spring term of 
her second year. We had completed one full cycle of the seasons. 

Halfway through April Naoko turned 20. She was seven months older 
than I was, my own birthday being in November. There was 
something strange about her becoming 20. I. felt as if the only thing 
that made sense, whether for Naoko or for me, was to keep going back 
and forth between 18 and 19. After 18 would come 19, and after 19, , of course. But she turned 20. And in the autumn, I would do the 
same. Only the dead stay 17 for ever. 

It rained on her birthday. After lectures I bought a cake nearby and 
took the tram to her flat. "We ought to have a celebration," I said. I 
probably would have wanted the same thing if our positions had been 
reversed. It must be hard to pass your twentieth birthday alone. The 
tram had been packed and had pitched so wildly that by the time I 

 



arrived at Naoko's room the cake was looking more like the Roman 
Colosseum than anything else. Still, once I had managed to stand up 
the 20 candles I had brought along, light them, close the curtains and 
turn out the lights, we had the makings of a birthday party. Naoko 
opened a bottle of wine. We drank, had some cake, and enjoyed a 
simple dinner. 

"I don’t know, it's stupid being 20," she said. "I'm just not ready. It 
feels weird. Like somebody's pushing me from behind." 

"I've got seven months to get ready," I said with a laugh. 

"You're so lucky! Still 19!" said Naoko with a hint of envy. 

While we ate I told her about Storm Trooper's new jumper. Until then 
he had had only one, a navy-blue pullover, so two was a big move for 
him. The jumper itself was a nice one, red and black with a knitted 
deer motif, but on him it made everybody laugh. He couldn’t work out 
what was going on. 

"W what's so funny, Watanabe?" he asked, sitting next to me in the 
dining hall. "Is something stuck to my forehead?" 

"Nothing," I said, trying to keep a straight face. "There's nothing 
funny. Nice jumper." 

"Thanks," he said, beaming. 

Naoko loved the story. "I have to meet him," she said. "Just once." 

"No way," I said. "You’d laugh in his face." "You think so?" 

"I'd bet on it. I see him every day, and still I can't help laughing 
sometimes." 

We cleared the table and sat on the floor, listening to music and 
drinking the rest of the wine. She drank two glasses in the time it took 
me to finish one. 

Naoko was unusually talkative that night. She told me about her 
childhood, her school, her family. Each episode was a long one, 
executed with the painstaking detail of a miniature. I was amazed at 
the power of her memory, but as I sat listening it began to dawn on me 
that there was something wrong with the way she was telling these 

 



stories: something strange, warped even. Each tale had its own 
internal logic, but the link from one to the next was odd. Before you 
knew it, story A had turned into story B, which had been contained in 
A, and then came C from something in B, with no end in sight. I found 
things to say in response at first, but after a while I stopped trying. I 
put on a record, and when it ended I lifted the needle and put on 
another. After the last record I went back to the first. She only had six. 
The cycle started with Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band and 
ended with Bill Evans' Waltz for Debbie. Rain fell past the window. 
Time moved slowly. Naoko went on talking by herself. 

It eventually dawned on me what was wrong: Naoko was taking great 
care as she spoke not to touch on certain things. One of those things 
was Kizuki, of course, but there was more than Kizuki. And though 
she had certain subjects she was determined to avoid, she went on 
endlessly and in incredible detail about the most trivial, inane things. I 
had never heard her speak with such intensity before, and so I did not 
interrupt her. 

Once the clock struck eleven, though, I began to feel nervous. She had 
been talking non-stop for more than four hours. I had to worry about 
the last train, and my midnight curfew. I saw my chance and cut in. 
"Time for the troops to go home," I said, looking at my watch. "Last 
train's coming." 

My words did not seem to reach her. Or, if they did, she was unable to 
grasp their meaning. She clamped her mouth shut for a split second, 
then went on with her story. I gave up and. shifting to a more 
comfortable position, drank what was left of the second bottle of wine. 
I thought I had better let her talk herself out. The curfew and the last 
train would have to take care of themselves. 

She did not go on for long, though. Before I knew it, she had stopped 
talking. The ragged end of the last word she spoke seemed to float in 
the air, where it had been torn off. She had not actually finished what 
she was saying. Her words had simply evaporated. She had been 

 



trying to go on, but had come up against nothing. Something was gone 
now, and I was probably the one who had destroyed it. My words 
might have finally reached her, taken their time to be understood, and 
obliterated whatever energy it was that had kept her talking so long. 
Lips slightly parted, she turned her half focused eyes on mine. She 
looked like some kind of machine that had been humming along until 
someone pulled the plug. Her eyes appeared clouded, as if covered by 
some thin, translucent membrane. 

"Sorry to interrupt," I said, "but it's getting late, and ..." 

One big tear spilled from her eye, ran down her cheek and splattered 
onto a record jacket. Once that first tear broke free, the rest followed 
in an unbroken stream. Naoko bent forwards on all fours on the floor 
and, pressing her palms to the mat, began to cry with the force of a 
person vomiting. Never in my life had I seen anyone cry with such 
intensity. I reached out and placed a hand on her trembling shoulder. 
Then, all but instinctively, I took her in my arms. Pressed against me, 
her whole body trembling, she continued to cry without a sound. My 
shirt became damp - then soaked - with her tears and hot breath. Soon 
her fingers began to move across my back as if in search of 
something, some important thing that had always been there. 
Supporting her weight with my left arm, I used my right hand to 
caress her soft, straight hair. And I waited. In that position, I waited 
for Naoko to stop crying. And I went on waiting. But Naoko's crying 
never stopped. 

I slept with Naoko that night. Was it the right thing to do? I can't tell. 
Even now, almost 20 years later, I can't be sure. I suppose I'll never 
know. But at the time, it was all I could do. She was in a heightened 
state of tension and confusion, and she made it clear she wanted me to 
give her release. I turned the lights down and began, one piece at a 
time, with the gentlest touch I could manage, to remove her clothes. 
Then I undressed. It was warm enough, that rainy April night, for us to 
cling to each other's nakedness without a sense of chill. We explored 

 



each other's bodies in the darkness without words. I kissed her and 
held her soft breasts in my hands. She clutched at my erection. Her 
opening was warm and wet and asking for me. 

And yet, when I went inside her, Naoko tensed with pain. Was this her 
first time? I asked, and she nodded. Now it was my turn to be 
confused. I had assumed that Naoko had been sleeping with Kizuki all 
that time. I went in as far as I could and stayed that way for a long 
time, holding Naoko, without moving. And then, as she began to seem 
calmer, I allowed myself to move inside her, taking a long time to 
come to climax, with slow, gentle movements. Her arms tightened 
around me at the end. when at last she broke her silence. Her cry was 
the saddest sound of orgasm I had ever heard. 

When everything had ended, I asked Naoko why she had never slept 
with Kizuki. This was a mistake. No sooner had I asked the question 
than she took her arms from me and started crying soundlessly again. I 
pulled her bedding from the closet, spread it on the mat floor, and put 
her in beneath the covers. Smoking, I watched the endless April rain 
beyond the window. 

The rain had stopped when morning came. Naoko was sleeping with 
her back to me. Or maybe she hadn't slept at all. Whether she was 
awake or asleep, all words had left her lips, and her body now seemed 
stiff, almost frozen. I tried several times to talk to her, but she would 
not answer or move. I stared for a long time at her naked shoulder, but 
in the end I lost all hope of eliciting a response and decided to get up. 
The floor was still littered with record jackets, glasses, wine bottles 
and the ashtray I had been using. Half the caved-in birthday cake 
remained on the table. It was as if time had come to a halt. I picked up 
the things off the floor and drank two glasses of water at the sink. On 
Naoko's desk lay a dictionary and a French verb chart. On the wall 
above the desk hung a calendar, one without an illustration or photo of 
any kind, just the numbers of the days of the month. There were no 
memos or marks written next to any of the dates. 

 



I picked up my clothes and dressed. The chest of my shirt was still 
damp and chilly. It had Naoko's smell. On the notepad lying on the 
desk I wrote: I'd like to have a good long talk with you once you've 
calmed down. Please call me soon. Happy 

Birthday. I took one last look at Naoko's shoulder, stepped outside and 
quietly shut the door. 

No call came even after a week had passed. Naoko's house had no 
system for calling people to the phone, and so on Sunday morning I 
took the train out to Kokubunji. She wasn't there, and her name had 
been removed from the door. The windows and storm shutters were 
closed tight. The manager told me that Naoko had moved out three 
days earlier. He had no idea where she had moved to. 

I went back to the dorm and wrote Naoko a long letter addressed to 
her home in Kobe. Wherever she was, they would forward it to her at 
least. 

I gave her an honest account of my feelings. There was a lot I still 
didn't understand, I said, and though I was trying hard to understand, it 
would take time. Where I would be once that time had gone by, it was 
impossible for me to say now, which is why it was impossible for me 
to make promises or demands, or to set down pretty words. For one 
thing, we knew too little of each other. If, however, she would grant 
me the time, I would give it my best effort, and the two of us would 
come to know each other better. In any case, I wanted to see her again 
and have a good long talk. When I lost Kizuki, I lost the one person to 
whom I could speak honestly of my feelings, and I imagined it had 
been the same for Naoko. She and I had needed each other more than 
either of us knew. Which was no doubt why our relationship had taken 
such a major detour and become, in a sense, warped. I probably 
should not have done what I did, and yet I believe that it was all I 
could do. The warmth and closeness I felt for you at that moment was 
something I have never experienced before. I need you to answer this 

 



letter. Whatever that answer may be, I need to have it. 

No answer came. 

Something inside me had dropped away, and nothing came in to fill 
the empty cavern. There was an abnormal lightness to my body, and 
sounds had a hollow echo to them. I went to lectures more faithfully 
than ever. They were boring, and I never talked to my fellow students, 
but I had nothing else to do. I would sit by myself in the very front 
row of the lecture hall, speak to no one and eat alone. I stopped 
smoking. 

The student strike started at the end of May. "Dismantle the 
University!" they all screamed. Go ahead, do it, I thought. Dismantle 
it. Tear it apart. Crush it to bits. I don't give a damn. It would be a 
breath of fresh air. I'm ready for anything. I'll help if necessary. Just 
go ahead and do it. 

With the campus blockaded and lectures suspended, I started to work 
at a delivery company. Sitting with the driver, loading and unloading 
lorries, that kind of stuff. It was tougher than I thought. At first I could 
hardly get out of bed in the morning with the pain. The pay was good, 
though, and as long as I kept my body moving I could forget about the 
emptiness inside. I worked on the lorries five days a week, and three 
nights a week I continued my job at the record shop. Nights without 
work I spent with whisky and books. Storm Trooper wouldn't touch 
whisky and couldn’t stand the smell, so when I was sprawled on my 
bed drinking it straight, he'd complain that the fumes made it 
impossible for him to study and ask me to take my bottle outside. 

"You get the hell out," I growled. 

"But you know drinking in the dorm is a-a-against the rules." 

"I don't give a shit. You get out." 

He stopped complaining, but now I was annoyed. I went to the roof 
and drank alone. 

In June I wrote Naoko another long letter, addressing it again to her 
house in Kobe. It said pretty much the same thing as the first one, but 

 



at the end I added: Waiting for your 

answer is one of the most painful things I have ever been through. At 
least let me know whether or not I hurt you. When I posted it, 

I felt as if the cavern inside me had grown again. 

That June I went out with Nagasawa twice again to sleep with girls. It 
was easy both times. The first girl put up a terrific struggle when I 
tried to get her undressed and into the hotel bed, but when I began 
reading alone because it just wasn't worth it, she came over and started 
nuzzling me. Aid after I had done it with the second one, she started 
asking me all kinds of personal questions - how many girls had I slept 
with? Where was I from? Which university did I go to? What kind of 
music did I like? Had I ever read any novels by Osarnu Dazai? Where 
would I like to go if I could travel abroad? Did I think her nipples 
were too big? I made up some answers and went to sleep, but next 
morning she said she wanted to have breakfast with me, and she kept 
up the stream of questions 

over the tasteless eggs and toast and coffee. What kind of work did my 
father do? Did I get good marks at school? What month was I born? 
Had I ever eaten frogs? She was giving me a headache, so as soon as 
we had finished eating I said I had to go to work. 

"Will I ever see you again?" she asked with a sad look. 

"Oh, I'm sure we'll meet again somewhere before long," I said, and 
left. What the hell am I doing? I started wondering as soon as I was 
alone, feeling disgusted with myself. And yet it was all I could do. My 
body was hungering for women. All the time I was sleeping with 
those girls I thought about Naoko: the white shape of her naked body 
in the darkness, her sighs, the sound of the rain. The more I thought 
about these things, the hungrier my body grew. I went up to the roof 
with my whisky and asked myself where I thought I was heading. 
Finally, at the beginning of July, a letter came from Naoko. A short 
letter. 

 



Please forgive me for not answering sooner. But try to understand. It 
took me a very long time before I was in any condition to write, and I 
have started this letter at least ten times. Writing is a painful process 
for me. 

Let me begin with my conclusion. I have decided to take a year off 
from college. Officially, it's a leave of absence, but I suspect that I will 
never be going back. This will no doubt come as a surprise to you, but 
in fact I had been thinking about doing this for a very long time. I tried 
a few times to mention it to you, but I was never able to make myself 
begin. I was afraid even to pronounce the words. 

Try not to get so worked up about things. Whatever happened - or 
didn't happen - the end result would have been the same. This may not 
be the best way to put it, and I'm sorry if it hurts you. What I am 
trying to tell you is, I don’t want you to blame yourself for what 
happened with me. It is something I have to take on all by myself. I 
had been putting it off for more than a year, and so I ended up making 
things very difficult for you. There is probably no way to put it off any 
longer. 

After I moved out of my flat, I came back to my family's house in 
Kobe and was seeing a doctor for a while. He tells me there is a place 
in the hills outside Kyoto that would be perfect for me, and I'm 
thinking of spending a little time there. It's not exactly a hospital, more 
a sanatorium kind of thing with a far freer style of treatment. I'll leave 
the details for another letter. What I need now is to rest my nerves in a 
quiet place cut off from the world. 

I feel grateful in my own way for the year of companionship you gave 
me. Please believe that much even if you believe nothing else. You are 
not the one who hurt me. I myself am the one who did that. This is 
truly how I feel. 

For now, however, I am not prepared to see you. It's not that I don’t 
want to see you: I'm amply not prepared for it. The moment I feel 
ready, I will write to you. Perhaps then we can get to know each other 

 



better. As you say, this is probably what we should do: get to know 
each other better. 

Goodbye. 

I read Naoko's letter again and again, and each time I would be filled 
with that same unbearable sadness I used to feel whenever Naoko 
herself stared into my eyes. I had no way to deal with it, no place I 
could take it to or hide it away. Like the wind passing over my body, 
it had neither shape nor weight nor could I wrap myself in it. Objects 
in the scene would drift past me, but the words they spoke never 
reached my ears. 

I continued to spend my Saturday nights sitting in the hall. There was 
no hope of a phone call, but I didn't know what else to do with the 
time. I would switch on a baseball game and pretend to watch it as I 
cut the empty space between me and the television set in two, then cut 
each half in two again, over and over, until I had fashioned a space 
small enough to hold in my hand. 

I would switch the set off at ten, go back to my room, and go to sleep. 

At the end of the month. Storm Trooper gave me a firefly. It was in an 
instant coffee jar with air holes in the lid and containing some blades 
of grass and a little water. In the bright room the firefly looked like 
some kind of ordinary black insect you’d find by a pond somewhere, 
but Storm Trooper insisted it was the real thing. "I know a firefly 
when I see one," he said, and I had no reason or basis to disbelieve 
him. 

"Fine," I said. 'It’s a firefly." It had a sleepy look on its face, but it 
kept trying to climb up the slippery glass walls of the jar and falling 
back. 

"I found it in the quad," he said. 

"Here? By the dorm?" 

"Yeah. You know the hotel down the street? They release fireflies in 

 



their garden for summer guests. This one made it over here." 

Storm Trooper was busy stuffing clothes and notebooks into his black 
Boston bag as he spoke. 

We were several weeks into the summer holidays, and he and I were 
almost the only ones left in the dorm. I had carried on with my jobs 
rather than go back to Kobe, and he had stayed on for a practical 
training session. Now that the training had ended, he was going back 
to the mountains of Yamanashi. 

"You could give this to your girlfriend," he said. Tm sure she'd love 
it." 

"Thanks," I said. 

After dark the dorm was hushed, like a ruin. The flag had been 
lowered and the lights glowed in the windows of the dining hall. With 
so few students left, they turned on only half the lights in the place, 
keeping the right half dark and the left lighted. Still, the smell of 
dinner drifted up to me - some kind of cream stew. 

I took my bottled firefly to the roof. No one else was up there. A white 
vest hung on a clothesline that someone had forgotten to take in, 
waving in the evening breeze like the discarded shell of some huge 
insect. I climbed a steel ladder in the corner of the roof to the top of 
the dormitory's water tank. The tank was still warm with the heat of 
the sunlight it had absorbed during the day. I sat in the narrow space 
above the tank, leaning against the handrail and coming face-to-face 
with an almost full white moon. The lights of Shinjuku glowed to the 
right, Ikebukuro to the left. Car headlights flowed in brilliant streams 
from one pool of light to the other. A dull roar of jumbled sounds 
hung over the city like a cloud. 

The firefly made a faint glow in the bottom of the jar, its light all too 
weak, its colour all too pale. I hadn't seen a firefly in years, but the 
ones in my memory sent a far more intense light into the summer 
darkness, and that brilliant, burning image was the one that had stayed 
with me all that time. 

 



Maybe this firefly was on the verge of death. I gave the jar a few 
shakes. The firefly bumped against the glass walls and tried to fly, but 
its light remained dim. 

I tried to remember when I had last seen fireflies, and where it might 
have been. I could see the scene in my mind, but was unable to recall 
the time or place. I could hear the sound of water in the darkness and 
see an old-fashioned brick sluice gate. It had a handle you could turn 
to open and close the gate. The stream it controlled was small enough 
to be hidden by the grass on its banks. The night was dark, so dark I 
couldn't see my feet when I turned out my torch. Hundreds of fireflies 
drifted over the pool of water held back by the sluice gate, their hot 
glow reflected in the water like a shower of sparks. 

I closed my eyes and steeped myself in that long-ago darkness. I heard 
the wind with unusual clarity. A light breeze swept past me, leaving 
strangely brilliant trails in the dark. I opened my eyes to find the 
darkness of the summer night a few degrees deeper than it had been. 

I twisted open the lid of the jar and took out the firefly, setting it on 
the two-inch lip of the water tank. It seemed not to grasp its new 
surroundings. It hobbled around the head of a steel bolt, catching its 
legs on curling scabs of paint. It moved to the right until it found its 
way blocked, then circled back to the left. Finally, with some effort, it 
mounted the head of the bolt and crouched there for a while, 
unmoving, as if it had taken its last breath. 

Still leaning against the handrail, I studied the firefly. Neither I nor it 
made a move for a very long time. The wind continued sweeping past 
the two of us while the numberless leaves of the zelkova tree rustled 
in the darkness. 

I waited for ever. 

Only much later did the firefly take to the air. As if some thought had 
suddenly occurred to it, the firefly spread its wings, and in a moment 

 



it had flown past the handrail to float in the pale darkness. It traced a 
swift arc by the side of the water tank as though trying to bring back a 
lost interval in time. And then, after hovering there for a few seconds 
as if to watch its curved line of light blend into the wind, it finally 
flew off to the east. 

Long after the firefly had disappeared, the trail of its light remained 
inside me, its pale, faint glow hovering on and on in the thick darkness 
behind my eyelids like a lost soul. 

More than once I tried stretching my hand out in the dark. My fingers 
touched nothing. The faint glow remained, just beyond my grasp. 

 



During the summer holidays the university called in the riot police. 
They broke down the barricades and arrested the students inside. This 
was nothing new. It's what all the students were doing at the time. The 
universities were not so easily "dismantled". Massive amounts of 
capital had been invested in them, and they were not about to dissolve 
just because a few students had gone wild. And in fact those students 
who had sealed off the campus had not wanted to dismantle the 
university either. All they had really wanted to do was shift the 
balance of power within the university structure, about which I 
couldn’t have cared less. And so, when the strike was finally crashed, I 
felt nothing. 

I went to the campus in September expecting to find rubble. The place 
was untouched. The library's books had not been carted off, the tutors' 
offices had not been destroyed, the student affairs office had not been 
burned to the ground. I was thunderstruck. What the hell had they 
been doing behind the barricades? 

When the strike was defused and lectures started up again under 
police occupation, the first ones to take their seats in the classrooms 
were those arseholes who had led the strike. As if nothing had ever 
happened, they sat there taking notes and answering "present" when 
the register was taken. I found this incredible. After all, the strike was 
still in effect. There had been no declaration bringing it to an end. All 
that had happened was that the university had called in the riot police 
and torn down the barricades, but the strike itself was supposed to be 

 



continuing. The arseholes had screamed their heads off at the time of 
the strike, denouncing students who opposed it (or just expressed 
doubts about it), at times even trying them in their own kangaroo 
courts. I made a point of visiting those former leaders and asking why 
they were attending lectures instead of continuing to strike, but they 
couldn't give me a straight answer. What could they have said? That 
they were afraid of losing marks through lack of attendance? To think 
that these idiots had been the ones screaming for the dismantling of 
the university! What a joke. The wind changes direction a little, and 
their cries become whispers. 

Hey, Kizuki, I thought, you're not missing a damn thing. This world is 
a piece of shit. The arseholes are getting good marks and helping to 
create a society in their own disgusting image. 

For a while I attended lectures but refused to answer when they took 
the register. I knew it was a pointless gesture, but I felt so bad I had no 
choice. All I managed to do was isolate myself more than ever from 
the other students. By remaining silent when my name was called, I 
made everyone uncomfortable for a few seconds. None of the other 
students spoke to me, and I spoke to none of them. 

By the second week in September I reached the conclusion that a 
university education was meaningless. I decided to think of it as a 
period of training in techniques for dealing with boredom. I had 
nothing I especially wanted to accomplish in society that would 
require me to abandon my studies straight away, and so I went to my 
lectures each day, took notes, and spent my free time in the library 
reading or looking 
things up. 

And though that second week in September had rolled around, there 
was no sign of Storm Trooper. More than unusual, this was an earth- 
shattering development. University had started up again, and it was 
inconceivable that Storm Trooper would miss lectures. A thin layer of 

 



dust covered his desk and radio. His plastic cup and toothbrush, tea 
tin, insecticide spray and so on stood in a neat row on his shelf. 

I kept the room clean in his absence. I had picked up the habit of 
neatness over the past year and a half and without him there to take 
care of the room, I had no choice but to do it. I swept the floor each 
day, wiped the window every third day, and aired my mattress once a 
week, waiting for him to come back and tell me what a great job I had 
done. 

But he never came back. I returned from lectures one day to find all 
his stuff gone and his name tag removed from the door. I went to the 
dorm Head's room and asked what had happened. 

"He's withdrawn from the dormitory," he said. "You'll be alone in the 
room for the time being." 

I couldn't get him to tell me why Storm Trooper had disappeared. This 
was a man whose greatest joy in life was to control everything and 
keep others in the dark. 

Storm Trooper's iceberg poster stayed on the wall for a time, but I 
eventually took it down and replaced it with Jim Morrison and Miles 
Davis. This made the room seem a little more like my own. I used 
some of the money I had saved from work to buy a small stereo. At 
night I would drink alone and listen to music. I thought about Storm 
Trooper every now and then, but I enjoyed living alone. 

At 11.30 a.m. one Monday, after a lecture on Euripides in History of 
Drama, I took a ten-minute walk to a little restaurant and had an 
omelette and salad for lunch. The place was on a quiet backstreet and 
was slightly more expensive than the student dining hall, but you 
could relax there, and they knew how to make a good omelette. 
"They" were a married couple who rarely spoke to each other, plus 
one part-time waitress. As I sat there eating by the window, a group of 
four students came in, two men and two women, all rather neatly 
dressed. They took the table near the door, spent some time looking 

 



over the menu and discussing their options, until one of them reported 
their choices to the waitress. 

Before long I noticed that one of the girls kept glancing in my 
direction. She had extremely short hair and wore dark sunglasses and 
a white cotton mini-dress. I had no idea who she was, so I went on 
with my lunch, but she soon slipped out of her seat and came over to 
where I was sitting. With one hand on the edge of my table, she said, 
"You're Watanabe, aren't you?" 

I raised my head and looked at her more closely. Still I could not 
recall ever having seen her. She was the kind of girl you notice, so if I 
had met her before I should have been able to recognize her 
immediately, and there weren't that many people in my university who 
knew me by name. 

"Mind if I sit down?" she asked. "Or are you expecting somebody?" 

Still uncertain, I shook my head. "No, nobody's coming. Please." 

With a wooden clunk, she dragged a chair out and sat down opposite, 
staring straight at me through her sunglasses, then 
glancing at my plate. 

"Looks good," she said. 

"It is good. Mushroom omelette and green pea salad." "Damn," she 
said. "Oh, well. I'll get it next time. I’ve 
already ordered something else." 

"What are you having?" "Macaroni and cheese." 

"Their macaroni and cheese isn't bad, either," I said. "By the way, do I 
know you? I don't recall. .." 

"Euripides," she said. "Electra. "No god hearkens to the voice of lost 
Electra.' You know - the class just ended." 

I stared hard at her. She took off her sunglasses. At last I remembered 
her - a first-year I had seen in History of Drama. A striking change in 
hairstyle had prevented me recognizing her. 

"Oh," I said, touching a point a few inches below my shoulder, "your 
hair was down to here before the summer holidays." "You're right," 

 



she said. "I had a perm this summer, and it was just awful. I was ready 
to kill myself. I looked like a corpse on the beach with seaweed stuck 
to my head. So I decided as long as I was ready to die, I might as well 
cut it all off. At least it's cool in the summer." She ran her hand 
through her pixie cut and gave me a smile. 

"It looks good, though," I said, still munching my omelette. 

"Let me see your profile." 

She turned away and held the pose a few seconds. 

"Yeah, I thought so. It really looks good on you. Nicely shaped head. 
Pretty ears, too, uncovered like that." 

"So I'm not mad after all! I thought I looked good myself once I cut it 
all off. Not one guy likes it, though. They all tell me I look like a 
concentration camp survivor. What's this thing that guys have for girls 
with long hair? Fascists, the whole bunch of them! Why do guys all 
think girls with long hair are the classiest, the sweetest, the most 
feminine? I mean, I myself know at least 250 unclassy girls with long 
hair. Really." 

"I think you look better now than you did before," I said. And I meant 
it. As far as I could recall, with long hair she had been just another 
cute student. A fresh and physical life force surged from the girl who 
sat before me now. She was like a small animal that has popped into 
the world with the coming of spring. Her eyes moved like an 
independent organism with joy, laughter, anger, amazement and 
despair. I hadn't seen a face so vivid and expressive in ages, and I 
enjoyed watching it live and move. 

"Do you mean it?" she asked. 

I nodded, still munching on my salad. 

She put on her sunglasses and looked at me from behind them. 

"You're not lying, are you?" 

"I like to think of myself as an honest man," I said. "Far out." 

"So tell me: why do you wear such dark glasses?" 

"I felt defenceless when my hair got short all of a sudden. 

 



As if somebody had thrown me into a crowd all naked." "Makes 
sense," I said, eating the last of my omelette. She watched me with 
intense interest. 

"You don't have to go back to them?" I asked, indicating her three 
companions. 

"Nah. I'll go back when they serve the food. Am I interrupting your 
meal?" 

"There's nothing left to interrupt," I said, ordering coffee when she 
showed no sign of leaving. The wife took my dishes and brought milk 
and sugar. 

"Now you tell me," she said. "Why didn’t you answer today when they 
called the register? You are Watanabe, aren't you? 

Tom Watanabe?" 

"That’s me." 

"So why didn't you answer?" "I just didn't feel like it today." 

She took off her sunglasses again, set them on the table, and looked at 
me as if she were staring into the cage of some rare animal at a zoo. 

"I just didn’t feel like it today." You talk like Humphrey Bogart. Cool. 
Tough." 

"Don’t be silly. I’m just an ordinary guy like everybody else." 

The wife brought my coffee and set it on the table. I took a sip without 
adding sugar or milk. 

"Look at that. You drink it black." 

"It’s got nothing to do with Humphrey Bogart," I explained patiently. 
"I just don’t happen to have a sweet tooth. I think you've got me all 
wrong." 

"Why are you so tanned?" 

'Tve been hiking around the last couple of weeks. Rucksack. Sleeping 
bag." 

"Where'd you go?" 

"Kanazawa. Noto Peninsula. Up to Niigata." "Alone?" 

"Alone," I said. "Found some company here and there." "Some 

 



romantic company? New women in far-off places." "Romantic? Now I 
know you've got me wrong. How's a guy with a sleeping bag on his 
back and his face all stubbly supposed to have romance?" 

"Do you always travel alone like that?" "Uh-huh." 

"You enjoy solitude?" she asked, resting her cheek on her hand. 
"Travelling alone, eating alone, sitting by yourself in lecture halls ..." 
"Nobody likes being alone that much. I don't go out of my way to 
make friends, that's all. It just leads to disappointment." 

The tip of one earpiece in her mouth, sunglasses dangling down, she 
mumbled, ""Nobody likes being alone. I just hate to be disappointed.' 
You can use that line if you ever write your autobiography." 

"Thanks," I said. 

"Do you like green?" 

"Why do you ask?" 

"You're wearing a green polo shirt." 

"Not especially. I'll wear anything." 

""Not especially. I'll wear anything.' I love the way you talk. Like 
spreading plaster, nice and smooth. Has anybody ever told you that?" 
"Nobody," I said. 

"My name's Midori," she said. ""Green’. But green looks terrible on 
me. Weird, huh? It's like I'm cursed, don't you think? My sister's name 
is Momoko: "Peach girl'." 

"Does she look good in pink?" 

"She looks great in pink! She was born to wear pink. It's totally 
unfair." 

The food arrived at Midori's table, and a guy in a madras jacket called 
out to her, "Hey, Midori, come 'n' get it!" She waved at him as if to 
say "I know". 

"Tell me," she said. "Do you take lecture notes? In drama?" "I do." 

"I hate to ask, but could I borrow your notes? I've missed twice, and I 
don't know anybody in the class." "No problem," I said, pulling the 
notebook from my bag. 

 



After checking to make sure I hadn't written anything personal in it, I 
handed it to Midori. 

"Thanks," she said. "Are you coming to lectures the day after 
tomorrow?" 

"Yeah." 

"Meet me here at noon. I'll give you back your notebook and buy you 
lunch. I mean ... it's not as if you get an upset stomach or anything if 
you don't eat alone, right?" 

"No," I said. "But you don't have to buy me lunch just because I'm 
lending you my notebook." 

"Don't worry," she said. "I like buying people lunch. Anyway, 
shouldn’t you write it down somewhere? You won’t forget?" 

"I won't forget. Day after tomorrow. Twelve o'clock. Midori. Green." 
From the other table, somebody called out, "Hurry up, Midori, your 
food's getting cold!" 

She ignored the call and asked me, "Have you always talked like 
that?" 

"I think so," I said. "Never noticed before." And in fact no one had 
ever told me there was anything unusual about the way I spoke. 

She seemed to be mulling something over for a few seconds. Then she 
stood up with a smile and went back to her table. She waved to me as 
I walked past their table, but the three others barely glanced in my 
direction. 

At noon on Wednesday there was no sign of Midori in the restaurant. I 
thought I might wait for her over a beer, but the place started to fill up 
as soon as the drink arrived, so I ordered lunch and ate alone. I 
finished at 12.35, but still no Midori. Paying my bill, I went outside 
and crossed the street to a little shrine, where I waited on the stone 
steps for my head to clear and Midori to come. I gave up at one 
o'clock and went to read in the library. At two I went to my German 

 



lecture. 

When it was over I went to the student affairs office and looked for 
Midori's name in the class list for History of Drama. The only Midori 
in the class was Midori Kobayashi. Next I flipped through the cards of 
the student files and found the address and phone number of a Midori 
Kobayashi who had entered the university in 1969. She lived in a 
north-west suburb, Toshima, with her family. I slipped into a phone 
box and dialled the number. 

A man answered: "Kobayashi Bookshop." Kobayashi Bookshop? 

"Sorry to bother you," I said, "but I wonder if Midori might be in?" 

"No, she's not," he said. 

"Do you think she might be on campus?" 

"Hmm, no, she's probably at the hospital. Who's calling, please?" 
Instead of answering, I thanked him and hung up. The hospital? Could 
she have been injured or fallen ill? But the man had spoken without 
the least sense of emergency. "She's probably at the hospital," he had 
said, as easily as he might have said "She's at the fish shop". I thought 
about a few other possibilities until thinking itself became too 
problematic, then I went back to the donn and stretched out on my bed 
reading Lord Jim, which I’d borrowed from Nagasawa. When I had 
finished it, I went to his room to give it back. 

Nagasawa was on his way to the dining hall, so I went with him for 
dinner. 

"How’d the exams go?" I asked. The second round of upper level 
exams for the Foreign Ministry had been held in August. 
"Same as always," said Nagasawa as if it had been nothing. 

"You take 'em, you pass. Group discussions, interviews ... like 
screwin' a chick." 

"In other words, easy," I said. "When do they let you know?" 

"First week of October. If I pass. I'll buy you a big dinner." 

"So tell me, what kind of guys make it to round two? All superstars 

 



like you?" 

"Don't be stupid. They're a bunch of idiots. Idiots or weirdos. I'd say  per cent of the guys who want to be bureaucrats aren't worth shit. 
I'm not kidding. They can barely read." 

"So why are you trying to join the Foreign Ministry?" 

"All kinds of reasons," said Nagasawa. "I like the idea of working 
overseas, for one. But mainly I want to test my abilities. If I'm going 
to test myself, I want to do it in the biggest field there is - the nation. I 
want to see how high I can climb, how much power I can exercise in 
this insanely huge bureaucratic system. Know what I mean?" 

"Sounds like a game." 

"It is a game. I don’t give a damn about power and money per se. 
Really, I don't. I may be a selfish bastard, but I'm incredibly cool 
about shit like that. I could be a Zen saint. The one thing I do have, 
though, is curiosity. I want to see what I can do out there in the big, 
tough world." 

"And you have no use for "ideals', I suppose?" 

"None. Life doesn't require ideals. It requires standards of action." 

"But there are lots of other ways to live, aren't there?" I asked. 

"You like the way I live, don't you?" 

"That's beside the point," I said. "I could never get into Tokyo 
University; I can't sleep with any girl I want whenever I want to; I'm 
no great talker; people don't look up to me; I haven't got a girlfriend; 
and the future's not going to open up to me when I get a literature BA 
from a second-rate private university. What does it matter if I like the 
way you live?" 

"Are you saying you envy the way I live?" 

"No, I don't," I said. "I'm too used to being who I am. And I don’t 
really give a damn about Tokyo University or the Foreign Ministry. 
The one thing I envy you for is having a terrific girlfriend like 
Hatsumi." 

Nagasawa shut up and ate. When dinner was over he said, "You know. 

 



Watanabe, I have this feeling like, maybe 10 years or 20 years after 
we get out of this place, we're going to meet again somewhere. And 
one way or another, I think we're going to have some connection." 
"Sounds like Dickens," I said with a smile. 

"I guess it does," he said, smiling back. "But my hunches are usually 
right." 

The two of us left the dining hall and went out to a bar. We stayed 
there drinking until after nine. 

"Tell me, Nagasawa," I asked, "what is the "standard of action' in your 
life?" 

"You'll laugh if I tell you," he said. 

"No I won't." 

"All right," he said. "To be a gentleman." 

I didn’t laugh, but I nearly fell off my chair. "To be a gentleman? A 
gentleman?" 

"You heard me." 

"What does it mean to be a gentleman? How do you define it?" 

"A gentleman is someone who does not what he wants to do but what 
he should do." 

"You're the weirdest guy I've ever met," I said. 

"You're the straightest guy I've ever met," he said. And he paid for us 
both. 

I went to the following week's drama lecture, but still saw no sign of 
Midori Kobayashi. After a quick survey of the room convinced me she 
wasn't there, I took my usual seat in the front row and wrote a letter to 
Naoko while I waited for the lecturer to arrive. I wrote about my 
summer travels - the roads I had walked, the towns I had passed 
through, the 

people I had met. And every night I thought of you. Now that I can no 
longer see you, I realize how much I need you. University is incredibly 
boring, but as a matter of self-discipline I am going to all my lectures 

 



and doing all the assignments. Everything seems pointless since you 
left. I'd like to have a nice, long talk with you. If possible. I'd like to 
visit your sanatorium and see you for several hours. And, if possible. 
I'd like to go out walking with you side by side the way we used to. 
Please try to answer this letter - even a short note. I won't mind. 

I filled four sheets, folded them, slipped them into an envelope, and 
addressed it to Naoko care of her family. 

By then the lecturer had arrived, wiping the sweat from his brow as he 
took the register. He was a small, moumfullooking man who walked 
with a metal cane. While not exactly fun, the lectures in his course 
were always well prepared and worthwhile. After remarking that the 
weather was as hot as ever, he began to talk about the use of the deus 
ex machina in Euripides and explained how the concept of "god" was 
different in Euripides than in Aeschylus or Sophocles. He had been 
talking for some 15 minutes when the lecture-hall door opened and in 
walked Midori. She was wearing a dark blue sports shirt, cream- 
coloured cotton trousers and her usual sunglasses. After flashing a 
"sorry I'm late" kind of smile at the professor, she sat down next to 
me. Then she took a notebook - my notebook - from her shoulder bag, 
and handed it to me. Inside, I found a note: Sorry about Wednesday. 
Are you angry? 

The lecture was about half over and the professor was drawing a 
sketch of a Greek stage on the blackboard when the door opened again 
and two students in helmets walked in. They looked like some kind of 
comedy team, one tall, thin and pale, the other short, round and dark 
with a long beard that didn’t suit him. The tall one carried an armful of 
political agitation handbills. The short one walked up to the professor 
and said, with a degree of politeness, that they would like to use the 
second half of his lecture for political debate and hoped that he would 
cooperate, adding, "The world is full of problems far more urgent and 
relevant than Greek tragedy." This was more an announcement than a 
request. The professor replied, "I rather doubt that the world has 

 



problems far more urgent and relevant than Greek tragedy, but you're 
not going to listen to anything I have to say, so do what you like." 
Grasping the edge of the table, he set his feet on the floor, picked up 
his cane and limped out of the classroom. 

While the tall student passed out his handbills, the round one went to 
the podium and started lecturing. The handbills were full of the usual 
simplistic sloganeering: "SMASH 

FRAUDULENT ELECTIONS FOR UNIVERSITY PRESIDENT!", 
"MARSHAL ALL FORCES FOR NEW ALL-CAMPUS STRIKE!", 
"CRUSH THE IMPERIAL-EDUCATIONAL-INDUSTRIAL 
COMPLEX!" 

I had no problem with what they were saying, but the writing was 
lame. It had nothing to inspire confidence or arouse the passions. And 
the round man's speech was just as bad - the same old tune with 
different words. The true enemy of this bunch was not State Power but 
Lack of Imagination. 

"Let's get out of here," said Midori. 

I nodded and stood, and the two of us made for the door. The round 
man said something to me at that point, but I couldn't catch it. Midori 
waved to him and said. "See ya later." 

,Hey, are we counter-revolutionaries?" Midori asked me when we 
were outside. "Are we going to be strung upon telephone poles if the 
revolution succeeds?" 

"Let's have lunch first, just in case." 

"Good. There's a place I want to take you to. It's a bit far, though. Can 
you spare the time?" 

"Yeah, I'm free until my two o'clock class." 

Midori took me by bus to Yotsuya and showed me to a fancy boxed- 
lunch speciality shop in a sheltered spot just behind the station. The 
minute we sat down they served us soup and the lunch of the day in 
square, red-lacquered boxes. This was a place worth a bus ride to eat 
at. 

 



"Great food," I said. 

"And cheap, too. I've been coming here since school. My old school's 
just down the street. They were so strict, we had to sneak out to eat 
here. They'd suspend you if they caught you eating out." 

Without the sunglasses, Midori's eyes looked somewhat sleepier than 
they had the last time. When she was not playing with the narrow 
silver bracelet on her left wrist, she would be nibbing at the corners of 
her eyes with the tip of her little finger. 

"Tired?" I asked. 

"Kind of. I'm not getting enough sleep. But I'm OK, don’t worry," she 
said. "Sony about the other day. Something important came up and I 
just couldn’t get out of it. All of a sudden, in the morning. I thought 
about calling you at the restaurant, but I couldn’t remember the name, 
and I didn't know your home number. Did you wait long?" 

"No big deal. I've got a lot of time on my hands." 

A lot?" 

"Way more than I need. I wish I could give you some to help 5011 
sleep." 

Midori rested her cheek on her hand and smiled at me. "What a nice 
guy you are." 

"Not nice. I just have time to kill," I said. "By the way, I called your 
house that day and somebody told me you were at the hospital. 
Something wrong?" 

"You called my house?" she asked with a slight wrinkle forming 
between her eyebrows. "How did you get my number?" 

"Looked it up in the student affairs office. Anyone can do that." 

She nodded once or twice and started playing with the bracelet again. 
"I never would have thought of that. I suppose I could have looked up 
your number. Anyway, about the hospital. I'll tell you next time. I 
don’t feel like it now. Sorry." 

"That's OK. I didn't mean to pry." 

"No, you're not prying. I'm just kind of tired. Like a monkey in the 

 



rain." 

"Shouldn’t you go home and get some sleep?" "Not now. Let's get out 
of here." 

She took me to her old school, a short walk from Yotsuya. 

Passing the station, I thought about Naoko and our endless walking. It 
had all started from there. I realized that if I hadn't run into Naoko on 
the train that Sunday in May, My life would have been very different 
from what it was now. But then I changed my mind: no, even if we 
hadn't met that day, my life might not have been any different. We 
were supposed to meet. If not then, some other time. I didn’t have any 
basis for thinking this: it was just a feeling. 

Midori Kobayashi and I sat on a park bench together, looking at her 
old school. Ivy clung to the walls, and pigeons huddled under the 
gables, resting their wings. It was a nice, old building with character. 
A great oak tree stood in the playground, and a column of white 
smoke rose straight up beside it. The fading summer light gave the 
smoke a soft and cloudy look. 

"Do you know what that smoke is?" Midori asked me all of a sudden. 
"No idea," I said. 

"They're burning sanitary towels." 

"Really?" I couldn’t think of anything else to say. 

"Sanitary towels, tampons, stuff like that," she said with a smile. "It is 
a girls' school. The old caretaker collects them from all the receptacles 
and burns them in the incinerator. That's the smoke." 

"Whoa." 

"Yeah, that's what I used to say to myself whenever I was in class and 
saw the smoke outside the window. "Whoa'. Think about it: the school 
had almost a thousand girls. So, say 900 of them have started their 
periods, and maybe a fifth of them are menstruating at any one time:  girls. That's 180 girls' worth of towels in the receptacles every 
day." 

 



"I bet you're right - though I'm not sure about the maths." 

"Anyway, it's a lot. 180 girls. What do you think it feels like to collect 
and bum that much stuff?" 

"Can't imagine," I said. How could I have imagined what the old man 
was going through? Midori and I went on watching the smoke. 

"I really didn't want to go to this school," Midori said. She gave her 
head a little shake. "I wanted to go to an absolutely ordinary State 
school with ordinary people where I could relax and have fun like an 
ordinary teenager. But my parents thought it would look good for me 
to go to this fancy place. They're the ones who stuck me in here. You 
know: that's what happens when you do well in primary school. The 
teacher tells your parents "With marks like hers, she ought to go 
there.' So that's where I ended up. I went for six years and I never 
liked it. All I could think about was getting out. And you know. I've 
got certificates of merit for never having been late or missed a day of 
school. That's how much I hated the place. Get it?" 

"No, I don't get it." 

"It's because I hated the place so much. I wasn't going to let it beat me. 
If I’d let it get to me once I’d be finished. I was scared I'd just keep 
slipping down and down. I'd crawl to school with a temperature of . The teacher would ask me if I was sick, but I’d say no. When I 
left they gave me certificates for perfect attendance and punctuality, 
plus a French dictionary. That's why I'm taking German now. I didn’t 
want to owe this school anything. I'm not kidding." 

"Why did you hate it so much? 

"Did you like your school?" 

"Well, no, but I didn’t especially hate it, either. I went to an ordinary 
State school but I never thought about it one way or another." 

"Well, this school," Midori said, scratching the comer of her eye with 
her little finger, "had nothing but upper-class girls - almost a thousand 
girls with good backgrounds and good exam results. Rich girls. They 
had to be rich to survive. High tuition, endless contributions. 

 



expensive school trips. For instance, if we went to Kyoto, they’d put 
us up in a first-class inn and serve us tea ceremony food on lacquer 
tables, and they'd take us once a year to the most expensive hotel in 
Tokyo to study table manners. I mean, this was no ordinary school. 
Out of 160 girls in my class, I was the only one from a middle-class 
neighbourhood like Toshima. I looked at the school register once to 
see where the others lived, and every single one of them was from a 
rich area. Well, no, there was one girl from way out in Chiba with the 
farmers, so I got kind of friendly with her. And she was really nice. 
She invited rre to her house, though she apologized for how far I'd 
have to travel to get there. I went and it was incredible, this giant 
piece of land you’d have to walk 15 minutes to get around. It had this 
amazing garden and two dogs like compact cars they fed steaks to. 
But still, this girl felt embarrassed about living out in Chiba. This is a 
girl who would be driven to school in a Mercedes Benz if she was 
late! By a chauffeur! Like right out of the Green Hornet: the hat, the 
white gloves, the whole deal. And still she had this inferiority 
complex. Can you believe it?" 

I shook my head. 

"I was the only one in the whole school who lived in a place like Kita- 
Otsuka Toshima. And under "parent's profession' it said "bookshop 
owner'. Everybody in my class thought that was so neat: "Oh, you're 
so lucky, you can read any book you like' and stuff. Of course, they 
were thinking of some monster bookshop like Kinokuniya. They could 
never have imagined the poor, little Kobayashi Bookshop. The door 
creaks open and you see nothing but magazines. The steady sellers are 
the women's glossies with illustrated pull-out sections on the latest 
sexual techniques. The local housewives buy them and sit at the 
kitchen table reading them from cover to cover, and give 'em a try 
when their husbands get home. And they've got the most incredible 
positions! Is this what housewives have on their minds all day? The 
comics are the other big-seller: Magazine, Sunday, Jump. And of 

 



course the weeklies. So this "bookshop' is almost all magazines. Oh, 
there are a few books, paperbacks, mysteries and swashbucklers and 
romances. That's all that sells. And How-To books: how to win at Go, 
how to raise bonsai, how to give wedding speeches, how to have sex, 
how to stop smoking, you name it. We even sell writing supplies - 
stacks of ballpoint pens and pencils and notebooks next to the till. But 
that's it. No War and Peace, no Kenzaburo Oe, no Catcher in the Rye. 
That's the Kobayashi Bookshop. That's how "lucky' I am. Do you 
think I'm lucky?" 

"I can just see the place." 

"You know what I mean. Everybody in the neighbourhood comes 
there, some of them for years, and we deliver. It's a good business, 
more than enough to support a family of four; no debts, two daughters 
in college, but that's it. Nothing to spare for extras. They should never 
have sent me to a school like that. It was a recipe for heartache. I had 
to listen to them grumble to me every time the school asked for a 
contribution, and I was always scared to death I'd run out of money if 
I went out with my school friends and they wanted to eat somewhere 
expensive. It's a miserable way to live. Is your family rich?" 

"My family? No, my parents are absolutely ordinary working people, 
not rich, not poor. I know it's not easy for them to send me to a private 
university in Tokyo, but there's just me, so it's not that big a deal. 
They don't give me much to live on, so I work part-time. We live in a 
typical house with a little garden and our car is a Toyota Corolla." 
"What's your job like?" 

"I work in a Shinjuku record shop three nights a week. It's easy. I just 
sit there and mind the shop." 

"You're joking?" said Midori. "I don’t know, just looking at you I sort 
of assumed you’d never been hard up." 

"It's true. I have never been hard up. Not that I have tons of money, 
either. I'm like most people." 

"Well, "most people' in my school were rich," said Midori, palms 

 



resting on her lap. "That was the problem." 

"So now you'll have plenty of chances to see a world without that 
problem. More than you want to, maybe." 

"Hey, tell me, what do you think the best thing is about being rich?" 

"I don't know." 

"Being able to say you don't have any money. Like, if I suggested to a 
school friend we do something, she could say, 'Sorry, I don't have any 
money'. Which is something I could never say if the situation was 
reversed. If I said "I don’t have any money', it would really mean "I 
don't have any money'. It's sad. Like, if a pretty girl says "I look 
terrible today, I don’t want to go out,' that's OK, but if an ugly girl says 
the same thing people laugh at her. That's what the world was like for 
me. For six years, until last year." 

"You’ll get over it." 

"I hope so. University is such a relief! It's full of ordinary people." 

She smiled with the slightest curl of her lip and smoothed her short 
hair with the palm of her hand. 

"Do you have a job?" I asked. 

"Yeah, I write map notes. You know those little pamphlets that come 
with maps? With descriptions of the different neighbourhoods and 
population figures and points of interest. Here there's so-and-so hiking 
trail or such-and-such a legend, or some special flower or bird. I write 
the texts for those things. It's so easy! Takes no time at all. I can write 
a whole booklet with a day of looking things up in the library. All you 
have to do is master a couple of secrets and all kinds of work comes 
your way." 

"What kind of secrets?" 

"Like you put in some little something that nobody else has written 
and the people at the map company think you're a literary genius and 
send you more work. It doesn't have to be anything at all, just some 
tiny thing. Like, say, when they built a dam in this particular valley, 
the water covered over a village, but still every spring the birds come 

 



up from the south and you can see them flying over the lake. Put in 
one little episode like that and people love it, it's so graphic and 
sentimental. The usual part-timer doesn't bother with stuff like that, 
but I can make decent money with what I write." 

"Yeah, but you have to find those "episodes'." 

"True," said Midori with a tilt of her head. "But if you're looking for 
them, you usually find them. And if you don't, you can always make 
up something harmless." 

"Aha!" 

"Peace," said Midori. 

She said she wanted to hear about my dormitory, so I told her the 
usual stories about the raising of the flag and Storm Trooper's radio 
callisthenics. Storm Trooper especially made Midori laugh, as he 
seemed to do with everyone. She said she thought it would be fun to 
have a look at the dorm. There was nothing fun about the place, I told 
her: "Just a few hundred guys in grubby rooms, drinking and 
wanking." 

"Does that include you?" 

"It includes every man on the face of the earth," I explained. 

"Girls have periods and boys wank. Everybody." 

"Even ones with girlfriends? I mean, sex partners." 

"It's got nothing to do with that. The Keio student living next door to 
me has a wank before every date. He says it relaxes him." 

"I don't know much about that stuff. I was in a girls' school so long." 

"I guess the glossy women's magazines don't go into that." 

"Not at all!" she said, laughing. "Anyway, Watanabe, would you have 
some time this Sunday? Are you free?" 

"I'm free every Sunday. Until six, at least. That's when I go to work." 
"Why don't you visit me? At the Kobayashi Bookshop. The shop itself 
will be closed, but I have to hang around there alone all day. I might 
be getting an important phone call. How about lunch? I'll cook for 

 



you." 

"I'd like that," I said. 

Midori tore a page from a notebook and drew a detailed map of the 
way to her place. She used a red pen to make a large X where the 
house stood. 

"You can't miss it. There's a big sign: 'Kobayashi Bookshop'. Come at 
noon. I'll have lunch ready." 

I thanked her and put the map in my pocket. "I’d better get back to 
campus now," I said. "My German lecture starts at two." Midori said 
she had somewhere to go and took the train from Yotsuya. 

Sunday morning I got up at nine, shaved, did my laundry and hung out 
the clothes on the roof. It was a beautiful day. The first smell of 
autumn was in the air. Red dragonflies flitted around the quadrangle, 
chased by neighbourhood kids swinging nets. With no wind, the 
Rising Sun flag hung limp on its pole. I put on a freshly ironed shirt 
and walked from the dorm to the tram stop. A student neighbourhood 
on a Sunday morning: the streets were dead, virtually empty, most 
shops closed. What few sounds there were echoed with special clarity. 
A girl wearing sabots clip-clopped across the asphalt roadway, and 
next to the tram shelter four or five kids were throwing rocks at a row 
of empty cans. A florist's was open, so I went in and bought some 
daffodils. Daffodils in autumn: that was strange. But I had always 
liked that particular flower. 

Three old women were the only passengers on the Sunday morning 
tram. They all looked at me and my flowers. One of them gave me a 
smile. I smiled back. I sat in the last seat and watched the ancient 
houses passing close to the window. The tram almost touched the 
overhanging eaves. The laundry deck of one house had ten potted 
tomato plants, next to which a big black cat lay stretched out in the 
sun. In the garden of another house, a little girl was blowing soap 
bubbles. I heard an Ayumi Ishida song coming from somewhere, and 

 



could even catch the smell of curry cooking. The tram snaked its way 
through this private back-alley world. A few more passengers got on 
at stops along the way, but the three old women went on talking 
intently about something, huddled together face-to-face. 

I got off near Otsuka Station and followed Midori's map down a broad 
street without much to look at. None of the shops along the way 
seemed to be doing very well, housed as they were in old buildings 
with gloomy-looking interiors and faded writing on some of the signs. 
Judging from the age and style of the buildings, this area had been 
spared the wartime air raids, leaving whole blocks intact. A few of the 
places had been entirely rebuilt, but just about all had been enlarged or 
repaired in places, and it was these additions that tended to look 
shabbier than the old buildings themselves. 

The whole atmosphere of the place suggested that most of the original 
residents had become fed up with the cars, the filthy air, the noise and 
high rents and moved to the suburbs, leaving only cheap flats and 
company apartments 

and hard-to-sell shops and a few stubborn people who clung to old 
family properties. Everything looked blurred and grimy as though 
wrapped in a haze of exhaust fumes. 

Ten minutes' walk down this street brought me to a corner petrol 
station, where I turned right into a small block of shops, in the middle 
of which hung the sign for the Kobayashi Bookshop. True, it was not 
a big shop, but neither was it as small as Midori's description had led 
me to believe. It was just a typical neighbourhood bookshop, the same 
kind I used to run to on the very day the boys' comics came out. A 
nostalgic mood overtook me as I stood in front of the place. 

The whole front of the shop was sealed off by a big, rolldown metal 
shutter inscribed with a magazine advertisement: 

"WEEKLY BUNSHUN SOLD HERE THURSDAYS". I still had 15 
minutes before noon, but I didn't want to kill time wandering through 
the block with a handful of daffodils, so I pressed the doorbell beside 

 



the shutter and stepped a few paces back to wait. Fifteen seconds went 
by without an answer, and I was debating with myself whether to ring 
again when I heard a window clatter open above me. I looked up to 
see Midori leaning out and waving. 

"Come in," she yelled. "Lift the shutter." 

"Is it OK? I'm kind of early," I shouted back. 

"No problem. Come upstairs. I'm busy in the kitchen." She pulled the 
window closed. 

The shutter made a terrific grinding noise as I raised it three feet from 
the ground, ducked under, and lowered it again. The shop was pitch 
black inside. I managed to feel my way to the back stairway, tripping 
over bound piles of magazines. I unlaced my shoes and climbed the 
stairs to the living area. The interior of the house was dark and 
gloomy. The stairs led to a simple parlour with a sofa and easy chairs. 
It was a small room with dim light coming in the window, reminiscent 
of old Polish films. There was a kind of storage area on the left and 
what looked like the door to a bathroom. I had to climb the steep 
stairway with care to reach the second floor, but once I got there, it 
was so much brighter than the first that I felt greatly relieved. 

"Over here," called Midori's voice. To the right at the top of the stairs 
was what looked like a dining room, and beyond that a kitchen. The 
house itself was old. but the kitchen seemed to have been refitted 
recently with new cabinets and a bright, shiny sink and taps. Midori 
was preparing food. A pot was bubbling, and the air was filled with 
the smell of grilled fish. 

"There's beer in the fridge," she said with a glance in my direction. 
"Have a seat while I finish this." I took a can and sat at the kitchen 
table. The beer was so cold it might have been in the fridge for the 
best part of a year. On the table lay a small, white ashtray, a 
newspaper, and a soy sauce dispenser. There was also a notepad and 
pen, with a phone number and some figures on the pad that seemed to 
be calculations connected with shopping. 

 



"I should have this done in ten minutes," she said. "Can you stand the 
wait?" 

"Of course I can," I said. 

"Get good and hungry, then. I'm making a lot." 

I sipped my beer and focused on Midori as she went on cooking, her 
back to me. She worked with quick, nimble movements, handling no 
fewer than four cooking procedures at once. Over here she tasted a 
boiled dish, and the next second she was at the cutting board, rat-tat- 
tatting, then she took something out of the fridge and piled it in a 
bowl, and before I knew it she had washed a pot she had finished 
using. From the back she looked like an Indian percussionist - ringing 
a bell, tapping a block, striking a water-buffalo bone, each movement 
precise and economical, with perfect balance. I watched in awe. 

"Let me know if there's something I can do," I said, just in case. 

"That's OK," said Midori with a smile in my direction. "I'm used to 
doing everything alone." She wore slim blue jeans and a navy T-shirt. 
An Apple Records logo nearly covered the back of the shirt. She had 
extremely narrow hips, as if she had somehow skipped puberty when 
the hips grow fuller, and this gave her a far more androgynous look 
than most girls have in slim jeans. The light pouring in from the 
kitchen window gave her figure a kind of vague outline. 

"You really didn’t have to put together such a feast," I said. 

"It's no feast," answered Midori without turning my way. "I was too 
busy to do any real shopping yesterday. I'm just throwing together a 
few things I had in the fridge. Really, don't worry. Besides, it's 
Kobayashi family tradition to treat guests well. I don't know what it is, 
but we like to entertain. It's inborn; a kind of sickness. Not that we're 
especially nice or people love us or anything, but if somebody shows 
up we have to treat them well no matter what. We've all got the same 
personality flaw, for better or worse. Take my father, for example. He 
hardly drinks, but the house is full of alcohol. What for? To serve 
guests! So don't hold back: drink all the beer you want." 

 



"Thanks," I said. 

It suddenly dawned on me that I had left the daffodils downstairs. I 
had set them aside while unlacing my shoes. I slipped back downstairs 
and found the ten bright blossoms lying in the gloom. Midori took a 
tall, slim glass from the cupboard and arranged the flowers in it. 

"I love daffodils," said Midori. "I once sang "Seven Daffodils' in the 
school talent contest. Do you know it?" "Of course." 

"We had a folk group. I played guitar." 

She sang "Seven Daffodils' as she arranged the food on plates. 

Midori's cooking was far better than I had expected: an amazing 
assortment of fried, pickled, boiled and roasted dishes using eggs, 
mackerel, fresh greens, aubergine, mushrooms, radishes, and sesame 
seeds, all cooked in the delicate Kyoto style. 

"This is great," I said with my mouth full. 

"OK. tell me the truth now," Midori said. "You weren't expecting my 
cooking to be very good, were you - judging from the way I look?" 

"Not really," I said honestly. 

"You're from the Kansai region, so you like this kind of delicate 
flavouring, right?" 

"Don't tell me you changed style especially for me?" 

"Don't be ridiculous! I wouldn't go to that much trouble. No, we 
always eat like this." 

"So your mother - or your father - is from Kansai?" 

"Nope. My father was bom in Tokyo and my mother's from 
Fukushima. There's not a single Kansai person among my relatives. 
We're all from Tokyo or northern Kanto." 

"I don’t get it," I said. "How can you make this 100 per cent authentic 
Kansai-style food? Did somebody teach you?" 

"Well, it's kind of a long story," she said, eating a slice of fried egg. 
"My mother hated housework of any kind, and she almost never 

 



cooked anything. And we bad the business to think about, so it was 
always "Today we're so busy, let's get a take-away' or "Let's just buy 
some croquettes at the butcher's' and so on. I hated that even when I 
was little, I mean like cooking a big pot of curry and eating the same 
thing three days in a row. So then one day - I was in the fifth year of 
school -1 decided I was going to cook for the family and do it right. I 
went to the big Kinokuniya in Shinjuku and bought the biggest, 
handsomest cookbook I could find, and I mastered it from cover to 
cover: how to choose a cutting board, how to sharpen knives, how to 
bone a fish, how to shave fresh bonito flakes, everything. It turned out 
the author of the book was from the Kansai, so all my cooking is 
Kansai style." 

"You mean you learned how to make all this stuff from a book?!" 

"I saved my money and went to eat the real thing. That's how I learned 
flavourings. I've got pretty good intuition. I'm hopeless as a logical 
thinker, though." 

"It's amazing you could teach yourself to cook so well without having 
anyone to show you." 

"It wasn't easy," said Midori with a sigh, "growing up in a house 
where nobody gave a damn about food. I'd tell them I wanted to buy 
decent knives and pots and they wouldn't give me the money. "What 
we have now is good enough,’ they’d say, but I'd tell them that was 
crazy, you couldn’t bone a fish with the kind of flimsy knives we had 
at home, so they'd say, "What the hell do you have to bone a fish for?' 
It was hopeless trying to communicate with them. I saved up my 
allowance and bought real professional knives and pots and strainers 
and stuff. Can you believe it? Here's a 15-year-old girl pinching 
pennies to buy strainers and whetstones and tempura pots when all the 
other girls at school are getting huge allowances and buying beautiful 
dresses and shoes. Don't you feel sorry 
for me?" 

 



I nodded, swallowing a mouthful of clear soup with fresh junsai 
greens. 

"When I was in the sixth-form, I had to have an egg fryer - a long, 
narrow pan for making this dashimaki-style fried egg we're eating. I 
bought it with money I was supposed to use for a new bra. For three 
months I had to live with one bra. Can you believe it? I'd wash my bra 
at night, go crazy trying to dry it, and wear it the next day. And if it 
didn't dry right, I had a tragedy to deal with. The saddest thing in the 
world is wearing a damp bra. I'd walk around with tears pouring from 
my eyes. To think I was suffering this for an egg fryer!" 

"I see what you mean," I said with a laugh. 

"I know I shouldn’t say this, but actually it was kind of a relief to me 
when my mother died. I could run the family budget my way. I could 
buy what I liked. So now I’ve got a relatively complete set of cooking 
utensils. My father doesn't know a thing about the budget." 

"When did your mother die?" 

"Two years ago. Cancer. Brain tumour. She was in the hospital a year 
and a half. It was terrible. She suffered from beginning to end. Finally 
lost her mind; had to be doped up all the time, and still she couldn’t 
die, though when she did it was practically a mercy killing. It's the 
worst kind of death - the person's in agony, the family goes through 
hell. It took every yen we had. I mean, they'd give her these shots - 
bang, bang, x"20,000 a pop, and she had to have round-the-clock care. 
I was so busy with her, I couldn’t study, had to delay university for a 
year. And as if that weren't bad enough - " She stopped in mid¬ 
sentence, put her chopsticks down and sighed. "How did this 
conversation turn so dark all of a sudden?" 

"It started with the business about the bras," I said. 

"So anyway, eat your eggs and think about what I just told you,” 
Midori said with a solemn expression. 

Eating my portion filled me up, but Midori ate far less. "Cooking ruins 
my appetite," she said. She cleared the table, wiped up the crumbs. 

 



brought out a box of Marlboro, put one in her mouth and lit up with a 
match. Taking hold of the glass with the daffodils, she studied the 
blooms for a while. 

"I don't think I'll put them in a vase," she said. "If I leave them like 
this, it's like I just happened to pick them by a pond somewhere and 
threw them into the first thing that came to hand." 

"I did pick them by the pond at Otsuka Station," I said. 

She chuckled. "You are a weird one. Making jokes with a perfectly 
straight face." 

Chin in hand, she smoked half her cigarette, then crushed it out in the 
ashtray. She nibbed her eyes as if smoke had got into them. 

"Girls are supposed to be a little more elegant when they put out their 
cigarettes. You did that like a lumberjack. You shouldn't just cram it 
down in the ashtray but press it lightly around the edges of the ash. 
Then it doesn't get all bent up. And girls are never supposed to blow 
smoke through their noses. And most girls wouldn’t talk about how 
they wore the same bra for three months when they're eating alone 
with a man." 

"I am a lumberjack," Midori said, scratching next to her nose. "I can 
never manage to be chic. I try it as a joke sometimes, but it never 
sticks. Any more critiques for me?" 

"Girls don’t smoke Marlboro," I said. 

"What’s the difference? One tastes as bad as another." She turned the 
red Marlboro packet over and over in her hand. "I started smoking last 
month. It’s not as if I was dying for tobacco or anything. I just sort of 
felt like it." "Why's that?" I asked. 

She pressed her hands together on the table and thought about it for a 
while. "What’s the difference? You don't smoke?" "Stopped in June," I 
said. 

"How come?" 

"It was a pain. I hated running out of smokes in the middle of the 
night. I don’t like having something control me that way." 

 



"You're very clear about what you like and what you don't like," she 
said. 

"Maybe so," I said. "Maybe that's why people don't like me. Never 
have." 

"It's because you show it," she said. "You make it obvious you don’t 
care whether people like you or not. That makes some people angry." 
She spoke in a near mumble, chin in hand. "But I like talking to you. 
The way you talk is so unusual. "I don't like having something control 
me that way'." 

I helped her wash the dishes. Standing next to her, I wiped as she 
washed, and stacked everything on the worktop. "So," I said, "your 
family's out today?" 

"My mother's in her grave. She died two years ago." "Yeah, I heard 
that part." 

"My sister's on a date with her fiance. Probably on a drive. Her 
boyfriend works for some car company. He loves cars. I don't love 
cars." 

Midori stopped talking and washed. I stopped talking and wiped. 

"And then there's my father," she said after some time had gone by. 
"Right," I said. 

"He went off to Uruguay in June last year and he's been there ever 
since." 

"Uruguay?! Why Uruguay?" 

"He was thinking of settling there, believe it or not. An old army 
buddy of his has a farm there. All of a sudden, my father announces 
he's going, too, that there's no limit to what he can do in Uruguay, and 
he gets on a plane and that's that. We tried hard to stop him, like, 
"Why do you want to go to a place like that? You can't speak the 
language, you've hardly ever left Tokyo.' But he wouldn't listen. 
Losing my mother was a real shock to him. I mean, it made him a 

 



little cuckoo. That's how much he loved her. Really." 

There was not much I could say in reply. I stared at Midori with my 
mouth open. 

"What do you think he said to my sister and me when our mother 
died? "I would much rather have lost the two of you than her.’ It 
knocked the wind out of me. I couldn’t say a word. You know what I 
mean? You just can't say something like that. OK, he lost the woman 
he loved, his partner for life. I understand the pain, the sadness, the 
heartbreak. I pity him. But you don't tell the daughters you fathered 
"You should have died in her place'. I mean, that's just too terrible. 
Don't you agree?" 

"Yeah, I see your point." 

"That's one wound that will never go away," she said, shaking her 
head. "But anyway, everyone in my family's a little different. We've 
all got something just a little bit strange." 

"So it seems," I said. 

"Still, it is wonderful for two people to love each other, don't you 
think? I mean, for a man to love his wife so much he can tell his 
daughters they should have died in her place 
"Maybe so, now that you put it that way." 

"And then he dumps the two of us and runs off to Uruguay." 

I wiped another dish without replying. After the last one, Midori put 
everything back in the cabinets. 

"So, have you heard from your father?" I asked. 

"One postcard. In March. But what does he write? "It's hot here' or 
"The fruit's not as good as I expected'. Stuff like that. I mean, give me 
a break! One stupid picture of a donkey! He’s lost his marbles! He 
didn't even say whether he’d met that guy - that friend of his or 
whatever. He did add near the end that once he’s settled he’ll send for 
me and my sister, but not a word since then. And he never answers our 
letters." 

"What would you do if your father said "Come to Uruguay’?" 

 



"I'd go and have a look around at least. It might be fun. My sister says 
she’d absolutely refuse. She can't stand dirty things and dirty places." 

"Is Uruguay dirty?" 

"Who knows? She thinks it is. Like the roads are full of donkey shit 
and it's swarming with flies, and the toilets don't work, and lizards and 
scorpions crawl all over the place. She maybe saw a film like that. She 
can't stand flies, either. All she wants to do is drive through scenic 
places in fancy cars." 

"No way." 

"I mean, what's wrong with Uruguay? I’d go." "So who's running the 
shop?" 

"My sister, but she hates it. We have an uncle in the neighbourhood 
who helps out and makes deliveries. And I help when I have time. A 
bookshop's not exactly hard labour, so we can manage. If it gets to be 
too much, we'll sell the place." 

"Do you like your father?" 

Midori shook her head. "Not especially." "So how can you follow him 
to Uruguay?" 

"I believe in him." 

"Believe in him?" 

"yeah. I'm not that fond of him, but I believe in my father. 

How can I not believe in a man who gives up his house, his kids, his 
work, and runs off to Uruguay from the shock of losing his wife? Do 
you see what I mean?" 

I sighed. "Sort of, but not really." 

Midori laughed and patted me on the back. "Never mind," she said. "It 
really doesn't matter." 

One weird thing after another came up that Sunday afternoon. A fire 
broke out near Midori's house and, when we went up to the third-floor 
laundry deck to watch, we sort of kissed. It sounds stupid when I put it 
like that, but that was how things worked out. 

We were drinking coffee after the meal and talking about the 

 



university when we heard sirens. They got louder and louder and 
seemed to be increasing in number. Lots of people ran past the shop, 
some of them shouting. Midori went to a room facing the street, 
opened the window and looked down. "Wait here a minute," she said 
and disappeared; after which I heard feet pounding up stairs. 

I sat there drinking coffee alone and trying to remember where 
Uruguay was. Let's see, Brazil was over here, and Venezuela there, 
and Colombia somewhere over here, but I couldn't recall the location 
of Uruguay. A few minutes later Midori came down and urged me to 
hurry somewhere with her. I followed her to the end of the hall and 
climbed a steep, narrow stairway to a wooden deck with bamboo 
laundry poles. The deck was higher than most of the surrounding 
rooftops and gave a good view of the neighbourhood. Huge clouds of 
black smoke shot up from a place three or four houses away and 
flowed with the breeze out towards the high street. A burning smell 
filled the air. 

"It’s Sakamoto's place," said Midori, leaning over the railing. "They 
used to make traditional door fittings and stuff. They went out of 
business some time ago, though." 

I leaned over the railing with her and strained to see what was going 
on. A three-storey building blocked our view of the fire, but there 
seemed to be three or four fire engines over there working on the 
blaze. No more than two of them could squeeze into the narrow lane 
where the house was burning, the rest standing by on the high street. 
The usual crowd of gawkers filled the area. 

"Hey, maybe you should gather your valuables together and get ready 
to evacuate this place," I said to Midori. "The wind's blowing the other 
way now, but it could change any time, and you've got a petrol station 
right there. I'll help you pack." 

"What valuables?" said Midori. 

"Well, you must have something you’d want to save - bankbooks, 
seals, legal papers, stuff like that. Emergency cash." "Forget it. I'm not 

 



running away." 

"Even if this place bums?" 

"You heard me. I don't mind dying." 

I looked her in the eye, and she looked straight at me. I couldn’t tell if 
she was serious or joking. We stayed like that for a while, and soon I 
stopped worrying. 

"OK," I said. "I get it. I'll stay with you." 

"You'll die with me?" Midori asked with shining eyes. 

"No way," I said. "I’ll run if it gets dangerous. If you want to die, you 
can do it alone." 

"Cold-hearted bastard!" 

"I’m not going to die with you just because you made lunch for me. Of 
course, if it had been dinner. .." 

"Oh, well ... Anyway, let’s stay here and watch for a while. We can 
sing songs. And if something bad happens, we can think about it 
then." 

"Sing songs?" 

Midori brought two floor pillows, four cans of beer and a guitar from 
downstairs. We drank and watched the black smoke rising. She 
strummed and sang. I asked her if she didn't think this might anger the 
neighbours. Drinking beer and singing while you watched a local fire 
from the laundry deck didn’t seem like the most admirable behaviour I 
could think of. 

"Forget it," she said. "We never worry about what the neighbours 
might think." 

She sang some of the folk songs she had played with her group. I 
would have been hard pressed to say she was good, but she did seem 
to enjoy her own music. She went through all the old standards - 
"Lemon Tree", "Puff (The Magic Dragon)", "Five Hundred Miles", 
"Where Have All the Flowers Gone?", "Michael, Row the Boat 
Ashore". At first she tried to get me to sing bass harmony, but I was so 
bad she gave up and sang alone to her heart's content. I worked on my 

 



beer and listened to her sing and kept an eye on the fire. It flared up 
and died down several times. People were yelling and giving orders. A 
newspaper helicopter clattered overhead, took photographs and flew 
away. I worried that we might be in the picture. A policeman 
screamed through a loudspeaker for bystanders to get back. A little kid 
was crying for his mother. Glass shattered somewhere. Before long 
the wind began shifting unpredictably, and white ash flakes fell out of 
the air around us, but Midori went on sipping and singing. After she 
had gone through most of the songs she knew, she sang an odd one 
that she said she had written herself: 

I'd love to cook a stew for you, 

But I have no pot. 

I'd love to knit a scarf for you, 

But I have no wool. 

I'd love to write a poem for you, 

But I have no pen. 

"It's called "I Have Nothing'," Midori announced. It was a truly 
terrible song, both words and music. 

I listened to this musical mess thinking that the house would blow 
apart in the explosion if the petrol station caught fire. Tired of singing, 
Midori put down her guitar and slumped against my shoulder like a 
cat in the sun. 

"How did you like my song?" she asked. 

I answered cautiously, "It was unique and original and very expressive 
of your personality." 

"Thanks," she said. "The theme is that I have nothing." "Yeah, I kind 
of thought so." 

"You know," she said, "when my mother died. .." "Yeah?" 

"I didn't feel the least bit sad." 

"Oh." 

"And I didn't feel sad when my father left, either." "Really?" 

 



"It's true. Don't you think I'm terrible? Cold-hearted?" "I'm sure you 
have your reasons." 

"My reasons. Hmm. Things were pretty complicated in this house. But 
I always thought, I mean, they're my mother and father, of course I'd 
be sad if they died or I never saw them again. But it didn't happen that 
way. I didn't feel anything. Not sad, not lonely. I hardly even think of 
them. Sometimes I’ll have dreams, though. Sometimes my mother will 
be glaring at me out of the darkness and she'll accuse me of being 
happy she died. But I'm not happy she died. I'm just not very sad. And 
to tell the truth, I never shed a single tear. I cried all night when my 
cat died, though, when I was little." 

Why so much smoke? I wondered. I couldn't see flames, and the 
burning area didn’t seem to be spreading. There was just this column 
of smoke winding up into the sky. What could have kept burning so 
long? 

"But I’m not the only one to blame," Midori continued. "It’s true I have 
a cold streak. I recognize that. But if they - my father and mother - had 
loved me a little more, I would have been able to feel more - to feel 
real sadness, for example." 

"Do you think you weren't loved enough?" 

She tilted her head and looked at me. Then she gave a sharp, little nod. 
"Somewhere between "not enough' and "not at all'. I was always 
hungry for love. Just once, I wanted to know what it was like to get 
my fill of it - to be fed so much love I couldn't take any more. Just 
once. But they never gave that to me. Never, not once. If I tried to 
cuddle up and beg for something, they'd just shove me away and yell 
at me. "No! That costs too much!’ It’s all I ever heard. So I made up 
my mind I was going to find someone who would love me uncon¬ 
ditionally 365 days a year. I was still in primary school at the time, but 
I made up my mind once and for all." 

"Wow," I said. "And did your search pay off?" 

"That’s the hard part," said Midori. She watched the rising smoke for a 

 



while, thinking. "I guess I've been waiting so long I'm looking for 
perfection. That makes it tough." 

"Waiting for the perfect love?" 

"No, even I know better than that. I'm looking for selfishness. Perfect 
selfishness. Like, say I tell you I want to eat strawberry shortbread. 
And you stop everything you're doing and run out and buy it for me. 
And you come back out of breath and get down on your knees and 
hold this strawberry shortbread out to me. And I say I don't want it 
any more and throw it out of the window. That's what I'm looking 
for." 

"I'm not sure that has anything to do with love," I said with some 
amazement. 

"It does," she said. "You just don't know it. There are times in a girl’s 
life when things like that are incredibly important." 

"Things like throwing strawberry shortbread out of the window?" 
"Exactly. And when I do it, I want the man to apologize to me. "Now I 
see, Midori. What a fool I’ve been! I should have known that you 
would lose your desire for strawberry shortbread. I have all the 
intelligence and sensitivity of a piece of donkey shit. To make it up to 
you. I’ll go out and buy you something else. What would you like? 
Chocolate mousse? Cheesecake?’" 

"So then what?" 

"So then I'd give him all the love he deserves for what he’s done." 
"Sounds crazy to me." 

"Well, to me, that’s what love is. Not that anyone can understand me, 
though." Midori gave her head a little shake against my shoulder. "For 
a certain kind of person, love begins from something tiny or silly. 
From something like that or it doesn't begin at all." 

"I've never met a girl who thinks like you." 

"A lot of people tell me that," she said, digging at a cuticle. "But it's 
the only way I know how to think. Seriously. I'm just telling you what 
I believe. It's never crossed my mind that my way of thinking is 

 



different from other people's. I'm not trying to be different. But when I 
speak out honestly, everybody thinks I'm kidding or play-acting. 
When that happens, I feel like everything's such a pain!" 

"And you want to let yourself die in a fire?" 

"Hey, no, that's different. It's just a matter of curiosity." 

"What? Dying in a fire?" 

"No, I just wanted to see how you'd react," Midori said. "But, I'm not 
afraid of dying. Really. Like here. I'd just be overcome with smoke 
and lose consciousness and die before I knew it. That doesn't frighten 
me at all, compared to the way I saw my mother and a few relatives 
die. All my relatives die after suffering from some terrible illness. It's 
in the blood, I guess. It's always a long, long process, and at the end 
you almost can't tell whether the person is alive or dead. All that's left 
is pain and suffering." 

Midori put a Marlboro between her lips and lit it. 

"That's the kind of death that frightens me. The shadow of death 
slowly, slowly eats away at the region of life, and before you know it 
everything's dark and you can't see, and the people around you think 
of you as more dead than alive. I hate that. I couldn’t stand it." 

Another half hour and the fire was out. They had apparently kept it 
from spreading and prevented any injuries. All but one of the fire 
engines returned to base, and the crowd dispersed, buzzing with 
conversation. One police car remained to direct the traffic, its blue 
light spinning. Two crows had settled on nearby lamp-posts to observe 
the activity below. 

Midori seemed drained of energy. Limp, she stared at the sky and 
barely spoke. 

"Tired?" I asked. 

"Not really," she said. "I just sort of let myself go limp and spaced out. 
First time in a long time." 

 



She looked into my eyes, and I into hers. I put my arm around her and 
kissed her. The slightest twinge went through her shoulders, and then 
she relaxed and closed her eyes for several seconds. The early autumn 
sun cast the shadow of her lashes on her cheek, and I could see it 
trembling in outline. 

It was a soft and gentle kiss, one not meant to lead beyond itself. I 
would probably not have kissed Midori that day if we hadn't spent the 
afternoon on the laundry deck in the sun, drinking beer and watching a 
fire, and she no doubt felt the same. After a long time of watching the 
glittering rooftops and the smoke and the red dragonflies and other 
things, we had felt something warm and close, and we both probably 
wanted, half-consciously, to preserve that mood in some form. It was 
that kind of kiss. But as with all kisses, it was not without a certain 
element of danger. 

The first to speak was Midori. She held my hand and told me, with 
what seemed like some difficulty, that she was seeing someone. I said 
that I had sensed as much. 

"Do you have a girl you like?" she asked. 

"I do," I said. 

"But you're always free on Sundays, right?" "It's very complicated," I 
said. 

And then I realized that the brief spell of the early autumn afternoon 
had vanished. 

At five I said I had to go to work and suggested that Midori come with 
me for a snack. She said she had to stay home in case the phone rang. 

"I hate waiting at home all day for a call. When I spend the day alone, 
I feel as if my flesh is rotting little by little - rotting and melting until 
there's nothing left but a green puddle that gets sucked down into the 
earth. And all that stays behind are my clothes. That's how it feels to 
me, waiting indoors all day." "I'll keep you company next time you 
have to wait for a 

 



call," I said. ’As long as lunch is included." 

"Great," she said. "I'll arrange another fire for dessert." 

Midori didn’t come to the next day's History of Drama lecture. I went 
to the cafeteria afterwards and ate a cold, tasteless lunch alone. Then I 
sat in the sun and observed the campus scene. Two women students 
next to me were carrying on a long conversation, standing the whole 
time. One cradled a tennis racquet to her breast with all the loving care 
she might give a baby, while the other held some books and a Leonard 
Bernstein LP Both were pretty and obviously enjoying their 
discussion. From the direction of the student club building came the 
sound of a bass voice practising scales. Here and there stood groups of 
four or five students expressing whatever opinions they happened to 
hold, laughing and shouting to one another. There were skateboarders 
in the car park. A professor with a leather briefcase in his arms 
crossed the car park, avoiding them. In the quadrangle a helmeted girl 
student knelt on the ground, painting huge characters on a sign with 
something about American imperialism invading Asia. It was the 
usual midday university scene, but as I sat watching it with renewed 
attention, I became aware of something. In his or her own way, 
everyone I saw before me looked happy. Whether they were really 
happy or just looked it, I couldn’t tell. But they did look happy on this 
pleasant early afternoon in late September, and because of that I felt a 
kind of loneliness new to me, as if I were the only one here who was 
not truly part of the scene. 

Come to think of it, what scene had I been a part of in recent years? 
The last one I could remember was a pool hall near the harbour, where 
Kizuki and I played pool together in a spirit of total friendship. Kizuki 
died that night, and ever since a cold, stiffening wind had come 
between me and the world. This boy Kizuki: what had his existence 
meant to me? To this question I could find no answer. All I knew - 
with absolute certainty - was that Kizuki's death had robbed me for 

 



ever of some part of my adolescence. But what that meant, and what 
would come of it, were far beyond my understanding. 

I sat there for a long time, watching the campus and the people 
passing through it, and hoping, too, that I might see Midori. But she 
never appeared, and when the noon break ended, I went to the library 
to prepare for my German class. 

Nagasawa came to my room that Saturday afternoon and suggested we 
have one of our nights on the town. He would arrange an overnight 
pass for me. I said I would go. I had been feeling especially muddle- 
headed for the past week and was ready to sleep with anybody, it 
didn’t matter who. 

Late in the afternoon I showered and shaved and put on fresh clothes - 
a polo shirt and cotton jacket - then had dinner with Nagasawa in the 
dining hall and the two of us caught a bus to Shinjuku. We walked 
around a lively area for a while, then went to one of our usual bars and 
sat there waiting for a likely pair of girls. The girls tended to come in 
pairs to this bar - except on this particular evening. We stayed there 
almost two hours, sipping whisky and sodas at a rate that kept us 
sober. Finally, two friendly-looking girls took seats at the bar, 
ordering a gimlet and a margarita. Nagasawa approached them straight 
away, but they said they were waiting for their boyfriends. Still, the 
four of us enjoyed a pleasant chat until their dates showed up. 
Nagasawa took me to another bar to try our luck, a small 
place in a kind of cul-de-sac, where most of the customers were 
already drunk and noisy. A group of three girls occupied a table at the 
back. We joined them and enjoyed a little conversation, the five of us 
getting into a nice mood, but when Nagasawa suggested we go 
somewhere else for a drink, the girls said it was almost curfew time 
and they had to go back to their dorms. So much for our "luck". We 
tried one more place with the same result. For some reason, the girls 
were just not coming our way. 

 



At 11.30 Nagasawa was ready to give up. "Sorry I dragged you around 
for nothing," he said. 

"No problem," I said. "It was worth it to me just to see you have your 
off days sometimes, too." 

"Maybe once a year," he admitted. 

In fact, I didn’t care about getting laid any more. Wandering around 
Shinjuku on a noisy Saturday night, observing the mysterious energy 
created by a mixture of sex and alcohol, I began to feel that my own 
desire was a puny thing. 

"What are you going to do now, Watanabe?" 

"Maybe go to an all-nighter," I said. "I haven't seen a film in ages." 

"I'll be going to Hatsumi's then," said Nagasawa. "Do you mind?" 

"No way," I said. "Why should I mind?" 

"If you’d like, I could introduce you to a girl who'd let you spend the 
night." 

"Nah, I really am in the mood for a film." 

"Sorry," said Nagasawa. "I'll make it up to you some time." And he 
disappeared into the crowd. I went into a fast food place for a 
cheeseburger and some coffee to kill the buzz, then went to see The 
Graduate in an old rep house. I didn’t think it was all that good, but I 
didn't have anything better to do, so I stayed and watched it again. 
Emerging from the cinema at four in the morning, I wandered along 
the chilly streets of Shinjuku, thinking. 

When I tired of walking, I went to an all-night cafe and waited with a 
book and a cup of coffee for the morning trains to start. Before long, 
the place became crowded with people who, like me, were waiting for 
those first trains. A waiter came to ask me apologetically if I would 
mind sharing my table. I said it would be all right. It didn't matter to 
me who sat across from me: I was just reading a book. 

My companions at the table turned out to be two girls. They looked 
about my age. Neither of them was a knockout, but they weren't bad. 
Both were reserved in the way they dressed and made up: they were 

 



definitely not the type to be wandering around Shinjuku at five in the 
morning. I guessed they had just happened to miss the last train. They 
seemed relieved to sit with me: I was neatly dressed, had shaved in the 
evening, and to cap it all I was absorbed in Thomas Mann's The Magic 
Mountain. 

One of the girls was on the large side. She wore a grey parka and 
white jeans, carried a large vinyl pocketbook, and had large, shell¬ 
shaped earrings. Her friend was a small girl with glasses. She wore a 
blue cardigan over a checked shirt and had a turquoise ring. The 
smaller one had a habit of taking off her glasses and pressing her eyes 
with her fingertips. 

Both girls ordered cafe au lait and cake, which it took them some time 
to consume as they carried on what seemed like a serious discussion in 
hushed tones. The large girl tilted her head several times, while the 
small one shook hers just as often. I couldn't make out what they were 
saying because of the loud stereo playing Marvin Gaye or the Bee 
Gees or something, but it seemed the small girl was angry or upset and 
the large girl was trying to comfort her. I alternated passages of my 
book with glances in their direction. 

Clutching her shoulder bag to her breast, the smaller girl went to the 
ladies', at which point her companion spoke to me. 

"I'm sorry to bother you, but I wonder if you might know of ally bars 
in the neighbourhood that would still be serving drinks?" 

Taken off guard, I set my book aside and asked, "After five o'clock in 
the morning?" 

"Yes ... "If you ask me, at 5.20 in the morning, most people are on 
their way home to get sober and go to bed." 

"Yes, I realize that," she said, a bit embarrassed, "but my friend says 
she has to have a drink. It's kind of important." 

"There's probably nothing much you can do but go home and have a 
drink." 

"But I have to catch a 7.30 train to Nagano." 

 



"So find a vending machine and a nice place to sit. It's about all you 
can do." 

"I know this is asking a lot, but could you come with us? Two girls 
alone really can't do something like that." 

I had had a number of unusual experiences in Shinjuku, but I had 
never before been invited to have a drink with two strange girls at 5.20 
in the morning. Refusing would have been more trouble than it was 
worth, and time was no problem, so I bought an armload of sake and 
snacks from a nearby machine, and the three of us went to an empty 
car park by the west exit of the station to hold an impromptu drinking 
party. 

The girls told me they had become friends working at a travel agency. 
Both of them had graduated from college this year and started their 
first jobs. The small one had a boyfriend she had been seeing for a 
year, but had recently discovered he was sleeping with another girl 
and she had taken it hard. The larger one was supposed to have left for 
the mountains of Nagano last night for her brother's wedding, but she 
had decided to spend the night with her depressed friend and take the 
first express on Sunday morning. 

"It's too bad what you're going through," I said to the small one, "but 
how did you find out your boyfriend was sleeping with someone 
else?" 

Taking little sips of sake, the girl tore at some weeds underfoot. "I 
didn't have to work anything out," she said. "I opened his door, and 
there he was, doing it." 

"When was that?" 

"The night before last." 

"No way. The door was unlocked?" 

"Right." 

"I wonder why he didn't lock it?" 

"How the hell should I know?" 

"Yeah, how’s she supposed to feel?" said the larger one, who seemed 

 



truly concerned for her friend. "What a shock it must have been for 
her. Don't you think it’s terrible?" 

"I really can’t say," I answered. "You ought to have a good talk with 
your boyfriend. Then it’s a question of whether you forgive him or 
not." 

"Nobody knows how I feel," spat out the little one, still tearing grass. 

A flock of crows appeared from the west and sailed over a big 
department store. It was daylight now. The time for the Uain to 
Nagano was approaching, so we gave what was left of the sake to a 
homeless guy downstairs at the west exit, bought platform tickets and 
went in to see the big girl off. After the Uain pulled out of sight, the 
small girl and I somehow ended up going to a nearby hotel. Neither of 
us was particularly dying to sleep with the other, but it seemed 
necessary to bring things to a close. 

I undressed first and sat in the bath drinking beer with a vengeance. 
She got in with me and did the same, the two of us sttetched out and 
guzzling beer in silence. We couldn't seem to get drunk, though, and 
neither of us was sleepy. Her skin was very fair and smooth, and she 
had beautiful legs. I complimented her on her legs, but her "Thanks" 
was little more than a grunt. 

Once we were in bed, though, she was like a different person. She 
responded to the slightest touch of my hands, writhing and moaning. 
When I went inside her, she dug her nails into my back, and as her 
orgasm approached she called out another man’s name exactly 16 
times. I concenUated on counting them as a way to delay my own 
orgasm. Then the two of us fell asleep. 

She was gone when I woke at 12.30.1 found no note of any kind. One 
side of my head felt sUangely heavy from having drunk at an odd 
hour. I took a shower to wake myself, shaved and sat in a chair, naked, 
drinking a bottle of juice from the fridge and reviewing in order the 
events of the night before. Each scene felt unreal and sUangely distant, 
as though I were viewing it through two or three layers of glass, but 

 



the events had undoubtedly happened to me. The beer glasses were 
still sitting on the table, and a used toothbrush lay by the sink. 

I ate a light lunch in Shinjuku and went to a telephone box to call 
Midori Kobayashi on the off chance that she might be home alone 
waiting for a call again today. I let it ring 15 times but no one 
answered. I tried again 20 minutes later with the same results. Then I 
took a bus back to the dorm. A special delivery letter was waiting for 
me in the letterbox by the entry. It was from Naoko. 

m sf 

Thanks for your letter, wrote Naoko. Her family had forwarded it 
here, she said. Far from upsetting her, its arrival had made her very 
happy, and in fact she had been on the point of writing to me herself. 
Having read that much, I opened the window, took off my jacket and 
sat on the bed. I could hear pigeons cooing in a nearby roost. The 
breeze stirred the curtains. Holding the seven pages of writing paper 
from Naoko, I gave myself up to an endless stream of feelings. It 
seemed as if the colours of the real world around me had begun to 
drain away from my having done nothing more than read a few lines 
she had written. I closed my eyes and spent a long time collecting my 
thoughts. Finally, after one deep breath, I continued reading. 

It's almost four months since I came here, she went on. 

I've thought a lot about you in that time. The more I've thought, the 
more I've come to feel that I was unfair to you. I probably should have 
been a better, fairer person when it came to the way I treated you. 

This may not be the most normal way to look at things, though. Girls 
my age never use the word "fair". Ordinary girls as young as I am are 
basically indifferent to whether things are fair or not. The central 

 



question for them is not whether something is fair but whether or not 
it's beautiful or will make them happy. "Fair" is a man's word, finally, 
but I can't help feeling that it is also exactly the right word for me 
now. And because questions of beauty and happiness have become 
such difficult and convoluted propositions for me now, I suspect, I 
find myself clinging instead to other standards - like, whether or not 
something is fair or honest or universally true. 

In any case, though, I believe that I have not been fair to you and that, 
as a result, I must have led you around in circles and hurt you deeply. 
In doing so, however, I have led myself around in circles and hurt 
myself just as deeply. I say this not as an excuse or a means of self¬ 
justification but because it is true. If I have left a wound inside you, it 
is not just your wound but mine as well. So please try not to hate me. I 
am a flawed human being - a far more flawed human being than you 
realize. Which is precisely why I do not want you to hate me. Because 
if you were to do that, I would really go to pieces. I can't do what you 
can do: I can't slip inside my shell and wait for things to pass. I don't 
know for a fact that you are really like that, but sometimes you give 
me that impression. I often envy that in you, which may be why I led 
you around in circles so much. 

This may be an over-analytical way of looking at things. Don't you 
agree? The therapy they perform here is certainly not over-analytical, 
but when you are under treatment for several months the way I am 
here, like it or not, you become more or less analytical. "This was 
caused by that, and that means this, because of which such-and-such." 
Like that. I can't tell whether this kind of analysis is trying to simplify 
the world or complicate it. 

In any case, I myself feel that I am far closer to recovery than I once 
was, and people here tell me this is true. This is the first time in a long 
while I have been able to sit down and calmly write a letter. The one I 
wrote you in July was something I had to squeeze out of me (though, 
to tell the truth, I don't remember what I wrote - was it terrible?), but 

 



this time I am very, very calm. Clean air, a quiet world cut off from 
the outside, a daily schedule for living, regular exercise: those are 
what I needed, it seems. How wonderful it is to be able to write 
someone a letter! To feel like conveying your thoughts to a person, to 
sit at your desk and pick up a pen, to put your thoughts into words like 
this is truly marvellous. Of course, once I do put them into words, I 
find I can only express a fraction of what I want to say, but that's all 
right. I'm happy just to be able to feel I want to write to someone. And 
so I am writing to you. It's 7.30 in the evening. I've had my dinner and 
I've just finished my bath. The place is silent, and it's pitch black 
outside. I can't see a single light through the window. I usually have a 
clear view of the stars from here, but not today, with the clouds. 
Everyone here knows a lot about the stars, and they tell me "That's 
Virgo" or "That's Sagittarius". They probably leam whether they want 
to or not because there's nothing to do here once the sun goes down. 
Which is also why they know so much about birds and flowers and 
insects. Speaking to them, I realize how ignorant I was about such 
things, which is kind of nice. 

There are about 70 people living here. In addition, the staff (doctors, 
nurses, office staff, etc.) come to just over 20. It's such a wide-open 
place, these are not big numbers at all. Far from it: it might be more 
accurate to say the place is on the empty side. It's big and filled with 
nature and everybody lives quietly - so quietly you sometimes feel 
that this is the normal, real world, which of course it's not. We can 
have it this way because we live here under certain preconditions. 

I play tennis and basketball. Basketball teams are made up of both 
staff and (I hate the word, but there's no way around it) patients. When 
I'm absorbed in a game, though, I lose track of who are the patients 
and who are staff. This is kind of strange. I know this will sound 
strange, but when I look at the people around me during a game, they 
all look equally deformed. 

I said this one day to the doctor in charge of my case, and he told me 

 



that, in a sense, what I was feeling was right, that we are in here not to 
correct the deformation but to accustom ourselves to it: that one of our 
problems was our inability to recognize and accept our own 
deformities. Just as each person has certain idiosyncrasies in the way 
he or she walks, people have idiosyncrasies in the way they think and 
feel and see things, and though you might want to correct them, it 
doesn't happen overnight, and if you try to force the issue in one case, 
something else might go funny. He gave me a very simplified 
explanation, of course, and it's just one small part of the problems we 
have, but I think I understand what he was trying to say. It may well 
be that we can never fully adapt to our own deformities. Unable to 
find a place inside ourselves for the \ery real pain and suffering that 
these deformities cause, we come here to get away from such things. 
As long as we are here, we can get by without hurting others or being 
hurt by them because we know that we are "deformed". That's what 
distinguishes us from the outside world: most people go about their 
lives unconscious of their deformities, while in this little world of ours 
the deformities themselves are a precondition. Just as Indians wear 
feathers on their heads to show what tribe they belong to, we wear our 
deformities in the open. And we live quietly so as not to hurt one 
another. 

In addition to playing sports, we all participate in growing vegetables: 
tomatoes, aubergines, cucumbers, watermelons, strawberries, spring 
onions, cabbage, daikon radishes, and so on and on. We grow just 
about everything. We use greenhouses, too. The people here know a 
lot about vegetable farming, and they put a lot of energy into it. They 
read books on the subject and call in experts and talk from morning to 
night about which fertilizer to use and the condition of the soil and 
stuff like that. I have come to love growing vegetables. It's great to 
watch different fruits and vegetables getting bigger and bigger each 
day. Have you ever grown watermelons? They swell up, just like 
some kind of little animals. 

 



We eat freshly picked fruits and vegetables every day. They also serve 
meat and fish of course, but when you're living here you feel less and 
less like eating those because the vegetables are so fresh and 
delicious. Sometimes we go out and gather wild plants and 
mushrooms. We have experts on that kind of thing (come to think of 
it, this place is crawling with experts) who tell us which plants to pick 
and which to avoid. As a result of all this, I've gained over six pounds 
since I got here. My weight is just about perfect, thanks to the exercise 
and the good eating on a regular schedule. 

When we're not farming, we read or listen to music or knit. We don't 
have TV or radio, but we do have a very decent library with books and 
records. The record collection has everything from Mahler 
symphonies to the Beatles, and I'm always borrowing records to listen 
to in my room. 

The one real problem with this place is that once you're here you don't 
want to leave - or you're afraid to leave. As long as we're here, we feel 
calm and peaceful. Our deformities seem natural. We think we've 
recovered. But we can never be sure that the outside world will accept 
us in the same way. 

My doctor says it's time I began having contact with "outside people" 
- meaning normal people in the normal world. When he says that, the 
only face I see is yours. To tell the truth, I don’t want to see my 
parents. They're too upset over me, and seeing them puts me in a bad 
mood. Plus, there are things I have to explain to )ou. I'm not sure I 
can explain them very well, but they're important things I can't go on 
avoiding any longer. 

Still, you shouldn't feel that I'm a burden to you. The one thing I don't 
want to be is a burden to anyone. I can sense the good feelings you 
have for me. They make me very happy. All I am doing in this letter is 
trying to convey that happiness to you. Those good feelings of yours 
are probably just what I need at this point in my life. Please forgive 
me if anything I've written here upsets you. As I said before, I am a far 

 



more flawed human being than you realize. 

I sometimes wonder: IF you and I had met under absolutely ordinary 
circumstances, and IF we had liked each other, what would have 
happened? IF I had been normal and you had been normal (which, of 
course, you are) and there had been no Kizuki, what would have 
happened? Of course, this "IF" is way too big. I'm trying hard at least 
to be fair and honest. It's all I can do at this point. I hope to convey 
some small part of my feelings to you this way. 

Unlike an ordinary hospital, this place has free visiting hours. As long 
as you call the day before, you can come any time. You can even eat 
with me, and there's a place for you to stay. Please come and see me 
sometime when it's convenient for you. I look forward to seeing you. 
I'm enclosing a map. Sorry this turned into such a long letter. 

I read Naoko's letter all the way through, and then I read it again. 
After that I went downstairs, bought a Coke from the vending 
machine, and drank it while reading the letter one more time. I put the 
seven pages of writing paper back into the envelope and laid it on my 
desk. My name and address had been written on the pink envelope in 
perfect, tiny characters that were just a bit too precisely formed for 
those of a girl. I sat at my desk, studying the envelope. The return 
address on the back said Ami Hostel. An odd name. I thought about it 
for a 

few minutes, concluding that the "ami" must be from the French word 
for "friend". 

After putting the letter away in my desk drawer, I changed clothes and 
went out. I was afraid that if I stayed near the letter I would end up 
reading it 10, 20, who knew how many times? I walked the streets of 
Tokyo on Sunday without a destination in mind, as I had always done 
with Naoko. I wandered from one street to the next, recalling her letter 
line by line and mulling each sentence over as best I could. When the 
sun went down, I returned to the dorm and made a long-distance call 

 



to the Ami Hostel. A woman receptionist answered and asked my 
business. I asked if it might be possible for me to visit Naoko the 
following afternoon. I left my name and she said I should call back in 
half an hour. 

The same woman answered when I called back after dinner. It would 
indeed be possible for me to see Naoko, she said. I thanked her, hung 
up, and put a change of clothes and a few toiletries in my rucksack. 
Then I picked up The Magic Mountain again, reading and sipping 
brandy and waiting to get sleepy. Even so, I didn't fall asleep until 
after one o'clock in the morning. 

 




As soon as I woke at seven o'clock on Monday morning, I washed my 
face, shaved, and went straight to the dorm Head's room without 
eating breakfast to say that I was going to be gone for two days hiking 
in the hills. He was used to my taking short trips when I had free time, 
and reacted without surprise. I took a crowded commuter train to 
Tokyo Station and bought a bullet-train ticket to Kyoto, literally 
jumping onto the first Hikari express to pull out. I made do with 
coffee and a sandwich for breakfast and dozed for an hour. 

I arrived in Kyoto a few minutes before eleven. Following Naoko's 
instructions, I took a city bus to a small terminal serving the northern 
suburbs. The next bus to my destination would not be leaving until .35, I was told, and the trip would take a little over an hour. I 
bought a ticket and went to a bookshop across the street for a map. 
Back in the waiting room, I studied the map to see if I could find 
exactly where the Ami Hostel was located. It turned out to be much 
farther into the mountains than I had imagined. The bus would have to 
cross several hills in its trek north, then turn around where the canyon 
road dead-ended and return to the city. My stop would be just before 
the end of the line. There was a footpath near the bus stop, according 
to Naoko, and if I followed it for 20 minutes I would reach Ami 
Hostel. No 

wonder it was such a quiet place, if it was that deep in the mountains! 
The bus pulled out with about 20 passengers aboard, following the 
Kamo River through the north end of Kyoto. The tightly packed city 
streets gave way to more sparse housing, then fields and vacant land. 
Black tile roofs and vinyl -sided greenhouses caught the early autumn 
sun and sent it back with a glare. When the bus entered the canyon, 
the driver began hauling the steering wheel this way and that to follow 
the twists and curves of the road, and I began to feel queasy. I could 

 



still taste my morning coffee. By the time the number of curves began 
to decrease to the point where I felt some relief, the bus plunged into a 
chilling cedar forest. The trees might have been old growth the way 
they towered over the road, blocking out the sun and covering 
everything in gloomy shadows. The breeze flowing into the bus's open 
windows turned suddenly cold, its dampness sharp against the skin. 
The valley road hugged the river bank, continuing so long through the 
trees it began to seem as if the whole world had been buried for ever 
in cedar forest - at which point the forest ended, and we came to an 
open basin surrounded by mountain peaks. Broad, green farmland 
spread out in all directions, and the river by the road looked bright and 
clear. A single thread of white smoke rose in the distance. Some 
houses had laundry drying in the sun, and dogs were howling. Each 
farmhouse had firewood out front piled up to the eaves, usually with a 
cat resting somewhere on the pile. The road was lined with such 
houses for a time, but I saw not a single person. 

The scenery repeated this pattern any number of times. The bus would 
enter cedar forest, come out to a village, then go back into forest. It 
would stop at a village to let people off, but no one ever got on. Forty 
minutes after leaving the city, the bus reached a mountain pass with a 
wide-open view. The driver stopped the bus and announced that we 
would be waiting there for five or six minutes: people could step down 
from the bus if they wished. There were only four passengers left now, 
including me. We all got out and stretched or smoked and looked 
down at the panorama of Kyoto far below. The driver went off to one 
side for a pee. A suntanned man in his early fifties who had boarded 
the bus with a big, rope-tied cardboard carton asked me if I was going 
out to hike in the mountains. I said yes to keep things simple. 

Eventually another bus came climbing up from the other side of the 
pass and stopped next to ours. The driver got out, had a short talk with 
our driver, and the two men climbed back into their buses. The four of 
us returned to our seats, and the buses pulled out in opposite 

 



directions. It was not immediately clear to me why our bus had had to 
wait for the other one, but a short way down the other side of the 
mountain the road narrowed suddenly. Two big buses could never 
have passed each other on the road, and in fact passing ordinary cars 
coming in the other direction required a good deal of manoeuvring, 
with one or the other vehicle having to back up and squeeze into the 
overhang of a curve. 

The villages along the road were far smaller now, and the level areas 
under cultivation even narrower. The mountain was steeper, its walls 
pressed closer to the bus windows. They seemed to have just as many 
dogs as the other places, though, and the arrival of the bus would set 
off a howling competition. 

At the stop where I got off, there was nothing - no houses, no fields, 
just the bus stop sign, a little stream, and the trail opening. I slung my 
rucksack over my shoulder and started up the track. The stream ran 
along the left side of the trail, and a forest of deciduous trees lined the 
right. I had been climbing 

the gentle slope for some 15 minutes when I came to a road leading 
into the woods on the right, the opening barely wide enough to 
accommodate a car. AMI HOSTEL PRIVATE NO TRESPASSING 
read the sign by the road. 

Sharply etched tyre tracks ran up the road through the trees. The 
occasional flapping of wings echoed in the woods. The sound came 
through with strange clarity, as if amplified above the other voices of 
the forest. Once, from far away, I heard what might have been a rifle 
shot, but it was a small and muffled sound, as though it had passed 
through several filters. 

Beyond the woods I came to a white stone wall. It was no higher than 
my own height and, lacking additional barriers on top, would have 
been easy for me to scale. The black iron gate looked sturdy enough, 
but it was wide open, and there was no one manning the guardhouse. 
Another sign like the last one stood by the gate: AMI HOSTEL 

 



PRIVATE NO TRESPASSING. A few clues suggested the guard had 
been there until some moments before: the ashtray held three butt- 
ends, a tea cup stood there half empty, a transistor radio sat on a shelf, 
and the clock on the wall ticked off the time with a dry sound. I waited 
a while for the person to come back, but when that showed no sign of 
happening, I gave a few pushes to something that looked as if it might 
be a bell. The area just inside the gate was a car park. In it stood a 
mini-bus, a four-wheel drive Land Cruiser, and a dark blue Volvo. 
The car park could have held 30 cars, but only those three were parked 
there now. 

Two or three minutes went by, and then a gatekeeper in a navy-blue 
uniform came down the forest road on a yellow bicycle. He was a tall 
man in his early sixties with receding hair. He leaned the yellow bike 
against the guardhouse and said, "I'm very sorry to have kept you 
waiting," though he didn't sound sorry at all. The number 32 was 
painted in white on the bike's mudguard. When I gave him my name, 
he picked up the phone and repeated it twice to someone on the other 
end, replied "Yes, uh-huh, I see" to the other person, then hung up. 

"Go to the main building, please, and ask for Doctor Ishida," he said 
to me. "You take this road through the trees to a roundabout. Then 
take your second left - got that? Your second left - from the 
roundabout. You'll see an old house. Turn right and go through 
another bunch of trees to a concrete building. That's the main building. 
It's easy, just watch for the signs." 

I took the second left from the roundabout as instructed, and where 
that path ended I came to an interesting old building that obviously 
had been someone's country house once. It had a manicured garden 
with well-shaped rocks and a stone lantern. It must have been a 
country estate. Turning right through the trees, I saw a three-storey 
concrete building. It stood in a hollowed-out area, and so there was 
nothing overwhelming about its three storeys. It was simple in design 
and gave a strong impression of cleanliness. 

 



The entrance was on the second floor. I climbed the stairs and went in 
through a big glass door to find a young woman in a red dress at the 
reception desk. I gave her my name and said I had been instructed to 
ask for Doctor Ishida. She smiled and gestured towards a brown sofa, 
suggesting in low tones that I wait there for the doctor to come. Then 
she dialled a number. I lowered my rucksack from my back, sank 
down into the deep cushions of the sofa, and surveyed the place. It 
was a clean, pleasant lobby, with ornamental potted plants, tasteful 
abstract paintings, and a polished floor. As I waited, I kept my eyes on 
the floor's reflection of my shoes. 

At one point the receptionist assured me, "The doctor will be here 
soon." I nodded. What an incredibly quiet place! There were no 
sounds of any kind. It was as though everyone were taking a siesta. 
People, animals, insects, plants must all be sound asleep, I thought, it 
was such a quiet afternoon. 

Before long, though, I heard the soft padding of rubber soles, and a 
mature, bristly-haired woman appeared. She swept across the lobby, 
sat down next to me, crossed her legs and took my hand. Instead of 
just shaking it, she turned my hand over, examining it front and back. 
"You haven't played a musical instrument, at least not for some years 
now, have you?" were the first words out of her mouth. 

"No," I said, taken aback. "You’re right." 

"I can tell from your hands," she said with a smile. 

There was something almost mysterious about this woman. Her face 
had lots of wrinkles. These were the first thing to catch your eye, but 
they didn’t make her look old. Instead, they emphasized a certain 
youthfulness in her that transcended age. The wrinkles belonged 
where they were, as if they had been part of her face since birth. When 
she smiled, the wrinkles smiled with her; when she frowned, the 
wrinkles frowned, too. And when she was neither smiling nor frown¬ 
ing, the wrinkles lay scattered over her face in a strangely warm, 
ironic way. Here was a woman in her late thirties who seemed not 

 



merely a nice person but whose niceness drew you to her. I liked her 
from the moment I saw her. 

Wildly chopped, her hair stuck out in patches and the fringe lay 
crooked against her forehead, but the style suited her perfectly. She 
wore a blue work shirt over a white T-shirt, baggy, cream-coloured 
cotton Uousers, and tennis shoes. Long and slim, she had almost no 
breasts. Her lips moved constantly to one side in a kind of ironic curl, 
and the wrinkles at the comers of her eyes moved in tiny twitches. She 
looked like a kindly, skilled, but somewhat world-weary female 
carpenter. 

Chin drawn in and lips curled, she took some time to look me over 
from head to toe. I imagined that any minute now she was going to 
whip out her tape measure and start measuring me everywhere. 

"Can you play an instrument?" she asked. "Sorry, no," I said. 

"Too bad," she said. "It would have been fun." 

"I suppose so," I said. Why all this talk about musical instruments? 

She took a pack of Seven Stars from her breast pocket, put one 
between her lips, lit it with a lighter and began puffing away with 
obvious pleasure. 

"It crossed my mind that I should tell you about this place, Mr. - 
Watanabe, wasn't it? - before you see Naoko. So I arranged for the 
two of us to have this little talk. Ami Hostel is kind of unusual - you 
might find it a little confusing without any background knowledge. 
I'm right, aren't I, in supposing that you don't know anything about 
this place?" 

"Almost nothing." 

"Well, then, first of all - " she began, then snapped her fingers. "Come 
to think of it, have you had lunch? I'll bet you're hungry." 

"You're right, I am." 

"Come with me, then. We can talk over food in the dining hall. 
Lunchtime is over, but if we go now they can still make us 
something." 

 



She took the lead, hurrying down a corridor and a flight of stairs to the 
first-floor dining hall. It was a large room, with enough space for 
perhaps 200 people, but only half was in use, the other half partitioned 
off, like a resort hotel out of season. The day's menu listed a potato 
stew with noodles, salad, orange juice and bread. The vegetables 
turned out to be as delicious as Naoko had said in her letter, and I 
finished everything on my plate. 

"You obviously enjoy your food!" said my female companion. 

"It's wonderful," I said. "Plus, I've hardly eaten anything all day." 

"You're welcome to mine if you like. I'm full. Here, go ahead." 

"I will, if you really don’t want it." 

"I've got a small stomach. It doesn't hold much. I make up for what 
I'm missing with cigarettes." She lit another Seven Star. "Oh, by the 
way, you can call me Reiko. Everybody does." 

Reiko seemed to derive great pleasure from watching me while I ate 
the potato stew she had hardly touched and munched on her bread. 

"Are you Naoko's doctor?" I asked. 

"Me?! Naoko's doctor?!" She screwed up her face. "What makes you 
think I'm a doctor?" 

"They told me to ask for Doctor Ishida." 

"Oh, I get it. No no no, I teach music here. It's a kind of therapy for 
some patients, so for fun they call me "The Music Doctor' and 
sometimes "Doctor Ishida'. But I'm just another patient. I've been here 
seven years. I work as a music teacher and help out in the office, so 
it's hard to tell any more whether I'm a patient or staff. Didn’t Naoko 
tell you about me?" 

I shook my head. 

"That's strange," said Reiko. "I'm Naoko's room-mate. I like living 
with her. We talk about all kinds of things. Including you." 

"What about me?" 

"Well, first I have to tell you about this place," said Reiko, ignoring 

 



my question. "The first thing you ought to know is that this is no 
ordinary "hospital'. It's not so much for treatment as for 
convalescence. We do have a few doctors, of course, and they give 
hourly sessions, but they're just checking people's conditions, taking 
their temperature and things like that, not administering "treatments' 
as in an ordinary hospital. There are no bars on the windows here, and 
the gate is always wide open. People enter and leave voluntarily. You 
have to be suited to that kind of convalescence to be admitted here in 
the first place. In some cases, people who need specialized therapy 
end up going to a specialized hospital. OK so far?" 

"I think so," I said. "But what does this "convalescence' consist of? 
Can you give me a concrete example?" 

Reiko exhaled a cloud of smoke and drank what was left of her orange 
juice. "Just living here is the convalescence," she said. A regular 
routine, exercise, isolation from the outside world, clean air, quiet. 
Our farmland makes us practically self-sufficient; there's no TV or 
radio. We're like one of those commune places you hear so much 
about. Of course, one thing different from a commune is that it costs a 
bundle to get in here." 

A bundle?" 

"Well, it's not ridiculously expensive, but it's not cheap. Just look at 
these facilities. We've got a lot of land here, a few patients, a big staff, 
and in my case I've been here a long time. True, I'm almost staff 
myself so I get concessions, but still ... Now, how about a cup of 
coffee?" 

I said I’d like some. She stubbed out her cigarette and went over to the 
counter, where she poured two cups of coffee from a warm pot and 
brought them back to where we were sitting. She put sugar in hers, 
stirred it, frowned, and took 
a sip. 

-You know," she said, "this sanatorium is not a profitmaking 
enterprise, so it can keep going without charging as much as it might 

 



have to otherwise. The land was a donation. They created a 
corporation for the purpose. The whole place used to be the donor's 
summer home about 20 years ago. You saw the old house. I’m sure?" 

I said I had. 

"That used to be the only building on the property. It’s where they did 
group therapy. That’s how it all got started. The donor's son had a 
tendency towards mental illness and a specialist recommended group 
therapy for him. The doctor's theory was that if you could have a 
group of patients living out in the country, helping each other with 
physical labour and have a doctor for advice and check-ups, you could 
cure certain kinds of sickness. They tried it, and the operation grew 
and was incorporated, and they put more land under cultivation, and 
put up the main building five years ago." 

"Meaning, the therapy worked." 

"Well, not for everything. Lots of people don't get better. But also a 
lot of people who couldn't be helped anywhere else managed a 
complete recovery here. The best thing about this place is the way 
everybody helps everybody else. Everybody knows they're flawed in 
some way, and so they try to help each other. Other places don't work 
that way, unfortunately. Doctors are doctors and patients are patients: 
the patient looks for help to the doctor and the doctor gives his help to 
the patient. Here, though, we all help each other. We're all each other's 
mirrors, and the doctors are part of us. They watch us from the 
sidelines and they slip in to help us if they see we need something, but 
it sometimes happens that we help them. Sometimes we're better at 
something than they are. For example, I'm teaching one doctor to play 
the piano and another patient is teaching a nurse French. That kind of 
thing. Patients with problems like ours are often blessed with special 
abilities. So everyone here is equal - patients, staff - and you. You're 
one of us while you're in here, so I help you and you help me." Reiko 
smiled, gently flexing every wrinkle on her face. "You help Naoko 
and Naoko helps you." 

 



"What should I do, then? Give me an example." 

"First you decide that you want to help and that you need to be helped 
by the other person. Then you are totally honest. You will not lie, you 
will not gloss over anything, you will not cover up anything that might 
prove embarrassing to you. That's all there is to it." 

"I'll try," I said. "But tell me, Reiko, why have you been in here for 
seven years? Talking with you like this, I can't believe there's anything 
wrong with you." 

"Not while the sun's up," she said with a sombre look. "But when 
night comes, I start drooling and rolling on the floor." "Really?" 

"Don't be ridiculous. I'm kidding," she said, shaking her head with a 
look of disgust. "I'm completely well - for now, at least. I stay here 
because I enjoy helping other people get well, teaching music, 
growing vegetables. I like it here. We're all more or less friends. 
Compared to that, what have I got in the outside world? I'm 38, going 
on 40. I'm not like Naoko. There's nobody waiting for me to get out, 
no family to take me back. I don’t have any work to speak of, and 
almost no friends. And after seven years, I don't know what's going on 
out there. Oh, I'll read a paper in the library every once in a while, but 
I haven't set foot outside this property all that time. I wouldn’t know 
what to do if I left." 

"But maybe a new world would open up for you," I said. "It’s worth a 
try, don’t you think?" 

"Hmm, you may be right," she said, turning her cigarette lighter over 
and over in her hand. "But I’ve got my own set of problems. lean tell 
you all about them sometime if you like." 

I nodded in response. "And Naoko," I said, "is she any better?" 

"Hmm, we think so. She was pretty confused at first and we had our 
doubts for a while, but she’s calmed down now and improved to the 
point where she’s able to express herself verbally. She’s definitely 
heading in the right direction. But she should have received treatment 
a lot earlier. Her symptoms were already apparent from the time that 

 



boyfriend of hers, Kizuki, killed himself. Her family should have seen 
it, and she herself should have realized that something was wrong. Of 
course, things weren't right at home, either ..." 

"They weren't?" I shot back. 

"You didn’t know?" Reiko seemed more surprised than I was. 

I shook my head. 

"I’d better let Naoko tell you about that herself. She's ready for some 
honest talk with you." Reiko gave her coffee another stir and took a 
sip. "There's one more thing you need to know," she said. "According 
to the rules here, you and Naoko will not be allowed to be done 
together. Visitors can't be alone with patients. An observer always has 
to be present - which in this case means me. I'm sorry, but you'll just 
have to put up with me. OK?" 

"OK," I said with a smile. 

"But still," she said, "the two of you can talk about anything you’d 
like. Forget I'm there. I know pretty much everything there is to know 
about you and Naoko." 

"Everything?" 

"Pretty much. We have these group sessions, you know. So we learn a 
lot about each other. Plus Naoko and I talk about everything. We don't 
have many secrets here." 

I looked at Reiko as I drank my coffee. "To tell you the truth," I said, 
"I'm confused. I still don’t know whether what I did to Naoko in 
Tokyo was the right thing to do or not. I've been thinking about it this 
whole time, but I still don’t know." 

"And neither do I," said Reiko. "And neither does Naoko. That's 
something the two of you will have to decide for yourselves. See what 
I mean? Whatever happened, the two of you can turn it in the right 
direction - if you can reach some kind of mutual understanding. 
Maybe, once you've got that taken care of, you can go back and think 
about whether what happened was the right thing or not. What do you 
say?" 

 



I nodded. 

"I think the three of us can help each other - you and Naoko and I - if 
we really want to, and if we're really honest. It can be incredibly 
effective when three people work at it like that. How long can you 
stay?" 

"Well, I'd like to get back to Tokyo by early evening the day after 
tomorrow. I have to work, and I've got a German exam on Thursday." 
"Good," she said. "So you can stay with us. That way it won't cost you 
anything and you can talk without having to worry about the time." 
"With "us'?" I asked. 

"Naoko and me, of course," said Reiko. "We have a separate bedroom, 
and there's a sofa bed in the living room, so you'll be able to sleep 
fine. Don't worry." 

,,Do they allow that?" I asked. "Can a male visitor stay in a Woman's 
room?" 

"I don't suppose you're going to come in and rape us in the middle of 
the night?" 

"Don’t be silly." 

"So there's no problem, then. Stay in our place and we can have some 
nice, long talks. That would be the best thing. Then we can really 
understand each other. And I can play my guitar for you. I'm pretty 
good, you know." 

"Are you sure I'm not going to be in the way?" 

Reiko put her third Seven Star between her lips and lit it after 
screwing up the corner of her mouth. 

"Naoko and I have already discussed this. The two of us together are 
giving you a personal invitation to stay with us. Don’t you think you 
should just politely accept?" 

"Of course. I'll be glad to." 

Reiko deepened the wrinkles at the corners of her eyes and looked at 
me for a time. "You've got this funny way of talking," she said. "Don’t 
tell me you're trying to imitate that boy in Catcher in the Rye?" 

 



"No way!" I said with a smile. 

Reiko smiled too, cigarette in mouth. "You are a good person, though. 
I can tell that much from looking at you. I can tell these things after 
seven years of watching people come and go here: there are people 
who can open their hearts and people who can't. You're one of the 
ones who can. Or, more precisely, you can if you want to." 

"What happens when people open their hearts?" 

Reiko clasped her hands together on the table, cigarette dangling from 
her lips. She was enjoying this. "They get better," she said. Ash 
dropped onto the table, but she seemed not to notice. 

Reiko and I left the main building, crossed a hill, and passed by a 
pool, some tennis courts, and a basketball court. Two men - one thin 
and middle-aged, the other young and fat were on a tennis court. Both 
used their racquets well, but to me the game they were playing could 
not have been tennis. It seemed as if the two of them had a special 
interest in the bounce of tennis balls and were doing research in that 
area. They slammed the ball back and forth with a kind of strange 
concentration. Both were drenched in sweat. The young man, in the 
end of the court closer to us, noticed Reiko and came over. They 
exchanged a few words, smiling. Near the court, a man with no 
expression on his face was using a large mower to cut the grass. 
Moving on, we came to a patch of woods where some 15 or 20 neat 
little cottages stood at some distance from each other. The same kind 
of yellow bike the gatekeeper had been riding was parked at the 
entrance to almost every house. "Staff members and their families live 
here," said Reiko. 

"We have just about everything we need without going to the city," 
she said as we walked along. "Where food is concerned, as I said 
before, we're practically self-sufficient. We get eggs from our own 
chicken coop. We have books and records and exercise facilities, our 
own convenience store, and every week barbers and beauticians come 
to visit. We even have films at weekends. Anything special we need 

 



we can ask a staff member to buy for us in town. Clothing we order 
from catalogues. Living here is no problem." 

"But you can't go into town?" 

"No, that we can't do. Of course if there's something special, like we 
have to go to the dentist or something, that’s another matter, but as a 
rule we can’t go into town. Each person is completely free to leave this 
place, but once you've left you can't come back. You burn your 
bridges. You can't go off for a couple of days in town and expect to 
come back. It only stands to reason, though. Everybody would be 
coming and going." 

Beyond the trees we came to a gentle slope along which, at irregular 
intervals, was a row of two-storey wooden houses that had something 
odd about them. What made them look strange it's hard to say, but that 
was the first thing I felt when I saw them. My reaction was a lot like 
what we feel when we see unreality painted in a pleasant way. It 
occurred to me that this was what you might get if Walt Disney did an 
animated version of a Munch painting. All the houses were exactly the 
same shape and colour, nearly cubical, in perfect left-to-right 
symmetry, with big front doors and lots of windows. The road twisted 
its way among them like the artificial practice course of a driving 
school. There was a well-manicured flowering shrubbery in front of 
every house. The place was deserted, and curtains covered all the 
windows. 

"This is called Area C. The women live here. Us! There are ten 
houses, each containing four units, two people per unit. That's 80 
people all together, but at the moment there are only 32 of us." 

"Quiet, isn't it?" 

"Well, there's nobody here now," Reiko said. "I've been given special 
permission to move around freely like this, but everyone else is off 
pursuing their individual schedules. Some are exercising, some are 
gardening, some are in group therapy, some are out gathering wild 
plants. Each person makes up his or her own schedule. Let's see. 

 



what's Naoko doing now? I think she was supposed to be working on 
new paint and wallpaper. I forget. There are a few jobs like that that 
don't finish till five." 

Reiko walked into the building marked "C-7", climbed the stairs at the 
far end of the hallway, and opened the door on the right, which was 
unlocked. She showed me around the flat, a pleasant, if plain, four- 
room unit: living room, bedroom, kitchen, and bath. It had no extra 
furniture or unnecessary decoration, but neither was the place severe. 
There was nothing special about it, but being there was kind of like 
being with Reiko: you could relax and let the tension leave your body. 
The living room had a sofa, a table, and a rocking chair. Another table 
stood in the kitchen. Both tables had large ashtrays on them. The 
bedroom had two beds, two desks and a closet. A small night table 
stood between the beds with a reading lamp on top and a paperback 
turned face down. The kitchen had a small electric cooker that 
matched the fridge and was equipped for simple cooking. 

"No bath, just a shower, but it's pretty impressive, wouldn't you say? 
Bath and laundry facilities are communal." 

"It’s almost too impressive. My dorm room has a ceiling and a 
window." 

"Ah, but you haven't seen the winters here," said Reiko, touching my 
back to guide me to the sofa and sitting down next to me. "They're 
long and harsh. Nothing but snow and snow and more snow 
everywhere you look. It gets damp and chills you to the bone. We 
spend the winter shovelling snow. Mostly you stay inside where it's 
warm and listen to music or talk or knit. If you didn't have this much 
space, you’d suffocate. You'll see if you come here in the winter." 

Reiko gave a deep sigh as if picturing wintertime, then folded her 
hands on her knees. 

"This will be your bed," she said, patting the sofa. "We'll 

sleep in the bedroom, and you'll sleep here. You should be all right, 

don't you think?" 

 



"I'm sure I'll be fine." 

"So, that settles it," said Reiko. "We'll be back around five. Naoko and 
I both have things to do until then. Do you mind staying here alone?" 
"Not at all. I'll study my German." 

When Reiko left, I stretched out on the sofa and closed my eyes. I lay 
there steeping myself in the silence when, out of nowhere, I thought of 
the time Kizuki and I went on a motorbike ride. That had been 
autumn, too, I realized. Autumn how many years ago? Yes, four. I 
recalled the smell of Kizuki's leather jacket and the racket made by 
that red Yamaha 125cc bike. We went to a spot far down the coast, 
and came back the same evening, exhausted. Nothing special 
happened on the way, but I remembered it well. The sharp autumn 
wind moaned in my ears, and looking up at the sky, my hands 
clutching Kizuki's jacket, I felt as if I might be swept into outer space. 

I lay there for a long time, letting my mind wander from one memory 
to another. For some strange reason, lying in this room seemed to 
bring back old memories that I had rarely if ever recalled before. 
Some of them were pleasant, but others carried a trace of sadness. 

How long did this go on? I was so immersed in that torrent of memory 
(and it was a torrent, like a spring gushing out of the rocks) that I 
failed to notice Naoko quietly open the door and come in. I opened my 
eyes, and there she was. I raised my head and looked into her eyes for 
a time. She was sitting on the arm of the sofa, looking at me. At first I 
thought she might be an image spun into existence by my own 
memories. But it was the real Naoko. 

"Sleeping?" she whispered. 

"No," I said, "just thinking." I sat up and asked, "How are you?" 

"I'm good," she said with a little smile like a pale, distant scene. "I 
don't have much time, though. I'm not supposed to be here now. I just 
got away for a minute, and I have to go back right away. Don’t you 
hate my hair?" 

"Not at all," I said. "It's cute." Her hair was in a simple schoolgirl 

 



style, with one side held in place with a hairslide the way she used to 
have it in the old days. It suited her very well, as if she had always 
worn it that way. She looked like one of the beautiful little girls you 
see in woodblock prints from the Middle Ages. 

"It's such a pain, I have Reiko cut it for me. Do you really think it's 
cute?" 

"Really." 

"My mother hates it." She opened the hairslide, let the hair hang 
down, smoothed it with her fingers, and closed the hairslide again. It 
was shaped like a butterfly. 

"I wanted to see you alone before the three of us get together. Not that 
I had anything special to say. I just wanted to see your face and get 
used to having you here. Otherwise, I'd have trouble getting to know 
you again. I'm so bad with people." 

"Well?" I asked. "Is it working?" 

"A little," she said, touching her hairslide again. "But time's up. I've 
got to go." 

I nodded. 

"Torn," she began, "I really want to thank you for coming to see me. It 
makes me very happy. But if being here is any kind of burden to you, 
you shouldn’t hesitate to tell me so. This is a special place, and it has a 
special system, and some people can't get into it. So if you feel like 
that, please be honest and let me know. I won't be crushed. We're 
honest with each other here. We tell each other all kinds of things with 
complete honesty." 

"I'll tell you," I said. "I'll be honest." 

Naoko sat down and leaned against me on the sofa. When I put my 
arm around her, she rested her head on my shoulder and pressed her 
face to my neck. She stayed like that for a time, almost as if she were 
taking my temperature. Holding her, I felt warm in the chest. After a 
short while, she stood up without saying a word and went out through 
the door as quietly as she had come in. 

 



With Naoko gone, I went to sleep on the sofa. I hadn't intended to do 
so, but I fell into the kind of deep sleep I had not had for a long time, 
filled with a sense of Naoko's presence. In the kitchen were the dishes 
Naoko used, in the bathroom was the toothbrush Naoko used, and in 
the bedroom was the bed in which Naoko slept. Sleeping soundly in 
this flat of hers, I wrung the fatigue from every cell of my body, drop 
by drop. I dreamed of a butterfly dancing in the half-light. 

When I awoke again, the hands of my watch were pointing to 4.35. 
The light had changed, the wind had died, the shapes of the clouds 
were different. I had sweated in my sleep, so I dried my face with a 
small towel from my rucksack and put on a fresh vest. Going to the 
kitchen, I drank some water and stood there looking through the 
window over the sink. I was facing a window in the building opposite, 
on the inside of which hung several paper cut-outs - a bird, a cloud, a 
cow, a cat, all in skilful silhouette and joined together. As before, 
there was no sign of anyone about, and there were no sounds of any 
kind. I felt as if I were living alone in an extremely well-cared-for 
ruin. 

People started coming back to Area C a little after five Looking out of 
the kitchen window, I saw three women passing below. All wore hats 
that prevented me from telling their ages, but judging from their 
voices, they were not very young. Shortly after they had disappeared 
around a corner, four more women appeared from the same direction 
and, like the first group, disappeared around the same corner. An 
evening mood hung over everything. From the living room window I 
could see trees and a line of hills. Above the ridge floated a border of 
pale sunlight. 

Naoko and Reiko came back together at 5.30. Naoko and I exchanged 
proper greetings as if meeting for the first time. She seemed truly 
embarrassed. Reiko noticed the book I had been reading and asked 
what it was. Thomas Mann's The Magic Mountain, I told her. 

"How could you bring a book like that to a place like this?" she 

 



demanded. She was right, of course. 

Reiko then made coffee for the three of us. I told Naoko about Storm 
Trooper's sudden disappearance and about the last day I saw him, 
when he gave me the firefly. 

"I'm so sorry he's gone," she said. "I wanted to hear more stories about 
him." Reiko asked who Storm Trooper was, so I told her about his 
antics and got a big laugh from her. The world was at peace and filled 
with laughter as long as Storm Trooper stories were being told. 

At six we went to the dining hall in the main building for supper. 
Naoko and I had fried fish with green salad, boiled vegetables, rice 
and miso soup. Reiko limited herself to pasta salad and coffee, 
followed by another cigarette. 

"You don't need to eat so much as you get older," she said by way of 
explanation. 

Some 20 other people were there in the dining hall. A few newcomers 
arrived as we ate, meanwhile some others left. Aside from the variety 
in people's ages, the scene looked pretty much like that of the dining 
hall in my dormitory. Where it differed was the uniform volume at 
which people conversed. There were no loud voices and no whispers, 
no one laughing out loud or crying out in shock, no one yelling with 
exaggerated gestures, nothing but quiet conversations, all carrying on 
at the same level. People were eating in groups of three to five, each 
with a single speaker, to whom the others would listen with nods and 
grunts of interest, and when that person had finished speaking, the 
next would take up the conversation. I could not tell what they were 
saying, but the way they said it reminded me of the strange tennis 
game I had seen at noon. I wondered if Naoko spoke like this when 
she was with them and. strangely enough, I felt a twinge of loneliness 
mixed with jealousy. 

At the table behind me, a balding man in white with the authentic air 
of a doctor was holding forth to a nervouslooking young man in 
glasses and a squirrel-faced woman of middle age on the effects of 

 



weightlessness on the secretion of gastric juices. The two listened with 
an occasional "My goodness" or "Really?" but the longer I listened to 
the balding man's style of speaking, the less certain I became that, 
even in his white coat, he was really a doctor. 

No one in the dining hall paid me any special attention. No one stared 
or even seemed to notice I was there. My presence must have been an 
entirely natural event. 

Just once, though, the man in white spun around and asked me, "How 
long will you be staying?" 

"Two nights," I said. "I'll be leaving on Wednesday." 

"It's nice here this time of year, isn't it? But come again in winter. It's 
really nice when everything's white." 

"Naoko may be out of here by the time it snows," said Reiko to the 
man. 

"True, but still, the winter's really nice," he repeated with a sombre 
expression. I felt increasingly unsure as to whether or not he was a 
doctor. 

"What do you people talk about?" I asked Reiko, who seemed to not 
quite follow me. 

"What do we talk about? Just ordinary things. What happened that 
day, or books we've read, or tomorrow's weather, you know. Don't tell 
me you're wondering if people jump to their feet and shout stuff like: 
"It'll rain tomorrow if a polar bear eats the stars tonight!"' 

"No, no, of course not," I said. "I was just wondering what all these 
quiet conversations were about." 

"It's a quiet place, so people talk quietly," said Naoko. She made a 
neat pile of fish bones at the edge of her plate and dabbed at her 
mouth with a handkerchief. "There's no need to raise your voice here. 
You don't have to convince anybody of anything, and you don't have 
to attract anyone's attention." 

"I guess not," I said, but as I ate my meal in those quiet surroundings, 
I was surprised to find myself missing the hum of people. I wanted to 

 



hear laughter and people shouting for no reason and saying overblown 
things. That was just the kind of noise I had become weary of in 
recent months, but sitting here eating fish in this unnaturally quiet 
room, I couldn't relax. The dining hall had all the atmosphere of a 
specialized -machine-tool trade fair. People with a strong interest in a 
specialist field came together in a specific place and exchanged 
information understood only by themselves. 

Back in the room after supper, Naoko and Reiko announced that they 
would be going to the Area C communal bath and that if I didn't mind 
having just a shower, I could use the one in their bathroom. I would do 
that, I said, and after they were gone I undressed, showered, and 
washed my hair. I found a Bill Evans album in the bookcase and was 
listening to it while drying my hair when I realized that it was the 
record I had played in Naoko’s room on the night of her birthday, the 
night she cried and I took her in my arms. That had been only six 
months ago, but it felt like something from a much remoter past. 
Maybe it felt that way because I had thought about it so often - too 
often, to the point where it had distorted my sense of time. 

The moon was so bright, I turned the lights off and stretched out on 
the sofa to listen to Bill Evans’ piano. Streaming in through the 
window, the moonlight cast long shadows and splashed the walls with 
a touch of diluted Indian ink. I took a thin metal flask from my 
rucksack, let my mouth fill with the brandy it contained, allowed the 
warmth to move slowly down my throat to my stomach, and from 
there felt it spreading to every extremity. After a final sip, I closed the 
flask and returned it to my rucksack. Now the moonlight seemed to be 
swaying with the music. 

Twenty minutes later, Naoko and Reiko came back from the bath. 

"Oh! It was so dark here, we thought you had packed your bags and 
gone back to Tokyo!" exclaimed Reiko. 

"No way," I said. "I hadn't seen such a bright moon for years. I wanted 
to look at it with the lights off." 

 



"It's lovely, though," said Naoko. "Reiko, do we still have those 
candles from the last power cut?" 

"Probably, in a kitchen drawer." 


Naoko brought a large, white candle from the kitchen. I lit it, dripped 
a little wax into a plate, and stood it up. Reiko used the flame to light a 
cigarette. As the three of us sat facing the candle amid these hushed 
surroundings, it began to seem as if we were the only ones left on 
some far edge of the world. The still shadows of the moonlight and the 
swaying shadows of the candlelight met and melded on the white 
walls of the flat. Naoko and I sat next to each other on the sofa, and 
Reiko settled into the rocking chair facing us. 

"How about some wine?" Reiko asked me. 

"You're allowed to drink?" I asked with some surprise. 

"Well, not really," said Reiko, scratching an earlobe with a hint of 
embarrassment. "But they pretty much let it go. If it's just wine or beer 
and you don't drink too much. I've got a friend on the staff who buys 
me a little now and then." 

"We have our drinking parties," said Naoko with a mischievous air. 
"Just the two of us." 

"That's nice," I said. 

Reiko took a bottle of white wine from the fridge, opened it with a 
corkscrew and brought three glasses. The wine had a clear, delicious 
flavour that seemed almost homemade. When the record ended, Reiko 
brought out a guitar from under her bed, and after tuning it with a look 
of fondness for the instrument, she began to play a slow Bach fugue. 
She missed her fingering every now and then, but it was real Bach, 
with real feeling - warm, intimate, and filled with the joy of 
performance. 

"I started playing the guitar here," said Reiko. "There are no pianos in 
the rooms, of course. I'm self-taught, and I don't have guitar hands, so 

 



I'll never get very good, but I really love the instrument. It's small and 
simple and easy, kind of like a warm, little room." 

She played one more short Bach piece, something from a suite. Eyes 
on the candle flame, sipping wine, listening to Reiko's Bach, I felt the 
tension inside me slipping away. When Reiko ended the Bach, Naoko 
asked her to play a Beatles song. 

"Request time," said Reiko, winking at me. "She makes me play 
Beatles every day, like I'm her music slave." 

Despite her protest, Reiko played a fine "Michelle". 

"That's a good one," she said. "I really like that song." She took a sip 
of wine and puffed her cigarette. "It makes me feel like I'm in a big 
meadow in a soft rain." 

Then she played "Nowhere Man" and "Julia". Now and then as she 
played, she would close her eyes and shake her head. Afterwards she 
would return to the wine and the cigarette. 

"Play "Norwegian Wood'," said Naoko. 

Reiko brought a porcelain beckoning cat from the kitchen. It was a 
coin bank, and Naoko dropped a ? 100 piece from her purse into its 
slot. 

"What's this all about?" I asked. 

"It's a rule," said Naoko. "When I request "Norwegian Wood,' I have 
to put ? 100 into the bank. It's my favourite, so I make a point of 
paying for it. I make a request when I really want to hear it." 

"And that way I get my cigarette money!" said Reiko. 

Reiko gave her fingers a good flexing and then played "Norwegian 
Wood". Again she played with real feeling, but never allowed it to 
become sentimental. I took ? 100 coin from my pocket and dropped it 
into the bank. 

"Thank you," said Reiko with a sweet smile. 

"That song can make me feel so sad," said Naoko. "I don't know, I 
guess I imagine myself wandering in a deep wood. I'm all alone and 
it's cold and dark, and nobody comes to save me. That's why Reiko 

 



never plays it unless I request it. 

 



Sounds like Casablanca!" Reiko said with a laugh. 

She followed "Norwegian Wood" with a few bossa novas while I kept 
my eyes on Naoko. As she had said in her letter, she looked healthier 
than before, suntanned, her body firm from exercise and outdoor 
work. Her eyes were the same deep clear pools they had always been, 
and her small lips still trembled shyly, but overall her beauty had 
begun to change to that of a mature woman. Almost gone now was the 
sharp edge - the chilling sharpness of a thin blade - that could be 
glimpsed in the shadows of her beauty, in place of which there now 
hovered a uniquely soothing, quiet calm. I felt moved by this new, 
gentle beauty of hers, and amazed to think that a woman could change 
so much in the course of half a year. I felt as drawn to her as ever, 
perhaps more than before, but the thought of what she had lost in the 
meantime also gave me cause for regret. Never again would she have 
that self-centred beauty that seems to take its own, independent course 
in adolescent girls and no one else. 

Naoko said she wanted to hear about how I was spending my days. I 
talked about the student strike and Nagasawa. This was the first time I 
had ever said anything about him to her. I found it challenging to give 
her an accurate account of his odd humanity, his unique philosophy, 
and his uncentred morality, but Naoko seemed finally to grasp what I 
was trying to tell her. I hid the fact that I went out hunting girls with 
him, revealing only that the one person in the dorm I spent any real 
time with was this unusual guy. All the while, Reiko went through 
another practice of the Bach fugue she had played before, taking 
occasional breaks for wine and cigarettes. 

"He sounds like a strange person," said Naoko. "He is strange," I 
said. "But you like him?" 

"I'm not sure," I said. "I guess I can't say I like him. Nagasawa is 
beyond liking or not liking. He doesn't try to be liked. In that sense, 
he’s a very honest guy, stoic even. He doesn't try to fool anybody." 
""Stoic' sleeping with all those girls? Now that is weird," said Naoko, 

 



laughing. "How many girls has he slept with?" 

"It's probably up to 80 now," I said. "But in his case, the higher the 
numbers go, the less each individual act seems to mean. Which is 
what I think he's trying to accomplish." 

"And you call that "stoic'?" 

"For him it is." 

Naoko thought about my words for a minute. "I think he's a lot sicker 
in the head than I am," she said. 

"So do I," I said. "But he can put all of his warped qualities into a 
logical system. He's brilliant. If you brought him here, he'd be out in 
two days. "Oh, sure, I know all that,' he'd say. "I understand 
everything you're doing here.' He’s that kind of guy. The kind people 
respect." 

"I guess I'm the opposite of brilliant," said Naoko. "I don’t understand 
anything they're doing here - any better than I understand myself." 

"It's not because you're not smart," I said. "You're normal. I've got 
tons of things I don't understand about myself. We're both normal: 
ordinary." 

Naoko raised her feet to the edge of the sofa and rested her chin on 
her knees. "I want to know more about you," she said. 

"I'm just an ordinary guy - ordinary family, ordinary education, 
ordinary face, ordinary exam results, ordinary thoughts in my head." 
"You're such a big Scott Fitzgerald fan ... wasn't he the one who said 
you shouldn’t trust anybody who calls himself an ordinary man? You 
lent me the book!" said Naoko with a mischievous smile. 

"True," I said. "But this is no affectation. I really, truly believe deep 
down that I'm an ordinary person. Can you find something in me that's 
not ordinary?" 

"Of course I can!" said Naoko with a hint of impatience. "Don’t you 
get it ? Why do you think I slept with you? Because I was so drunk I 
would have slept with anyone?" 

"No, of course I don't think that," I said. 

 



Naoko remained silent for a long time, staring at her toes. At a loss for 
words, I took another sip of wine. 

"How many girls have you slept with, Toru?" Naoko asked in a tiny 
voice as if the thought had just crossed her mind. 

"Eight or nine," I answered truthfully. 

Reiko plopped the guitar into her lap. "You're not even 20 years old!" 
she said. "What kind of life are you leading?" 

Naoko kept silent and watched me with those clear eyes of hers. I told 
Reiko about the first girl I'd slept with and how we had broken up. I 
had found it impossible to love her, I explained. I went on to tell her 
about my sleeping with one girl after another under Nagasawa's 
tutelage. 

"I'm not trying to make excuses, but I was in pain," I said to Naoko. 
"Here I was, seeing you almost every week, and talking with you, and 
knowing that the only one in your heart was Kizuki. It hurt. It really 
hint. And I think that's why I slept with girls I didn't know." 

Naoko shook her head for a few moments, and then she raised her face 
to look at me. "You asked me that time why I had never slept with 
Kizuki, didn't you? Do you still want to know?" 

"I suppose it’s something I really ought to know," I said. 

"I think so, too," said Naoko. "The dead will always be dead, but we 
have to go on living." 

I nodded. Reiko played the same difficult passage over and over, 
trying to get it right. 

"I was ready to sleep with him," said Naoko, unclasping her hairslide 
and letting ter hair down. She toyed with the butterfly shape in her 
hands. "And of course he wanted to sleep with me. So we tried. We 
tried a lot. But it never worked. We couldn't do it. I didn’t know why 
then, and I still don’t know why. I loved him, and I wasn't worried 
about losing my virginity. I would have been glad to do anything he 
wanted. But it never worked." 

Naoko lifted the hair she had let down and fastened it with the slide. 

 



"I couldn’t get wet," she said in a tiny voice. "I never opened to him. 
So it always hurt. I was just too dry, it hurt too much. We tried 
everything we could think of - creams and things - but still it hurt me. 
So I used my fingers, or my lips. I would always do it for him that 
way. You know what I mean." 

I nodded in silence. 

Naoko cast her gaze through the window at the moon, which looked 
bigger and brighter now than it had before. "I never wanted to talk 
about any of this," she said. "I wanted to shut it up in my heart. I wish 
I still could. But I have to talk about it. I don’t know the answer. I 
mean, I was plenty wet the time I slept with you, wasn't I?" 

"Uh-huh," I said. 

"I was wet from the minute you walked into my flat the night of my 
twentieth birthday. I wanted you to hold me. I wanted you to take off 
my clothes, to touch me all over and enter me. I had never felt like 
that before. Why is that? Why do things happen like that? I mean, I 
really loved him." 

"And not me," I said. "You want to know why you felt that way about 
me, even though you didn’t love me?" 

"I'm sorry," said Naoko. "I don't mean to hurt you, but this much you 
have to understand: Kizuki and I had a truly special relationship. We 
had been together from the time we were three. It's how we grew up: 
always together, always talking, understanding each other perfectly. 
The first time we kissed it was in the first year of junior school - was 
just wonderful. The first time I had my period, I ran to him and cried 
like a baby. We were that close. So after he died, I didn't know how to 
relate to other people. I didn't know what it meant to love another 
person." 

She reached for her wineglass on the table but only managed to knock 
it over, spilling wine on the carpet. I crouched down and retrieved the 
glass, setting it on the table. Did she want to drink some more? I 
asked. Naoko remained silent for a while, then suddenly burst into 

 



tears, trembling all over. Slumping forward, she buried her face in her 
hands and sobbed with the same suffocating violence as she had that 
night with me. Reiko laid down her guitar and sat by Naoko, caressing 
her back. When she put an arm across Naoko's shoulders, she pressed 
her face against Reiko's chest like a baby. 

"You know," Reiko said to me, "it might be a good idea for you to go 
out for a little walk. Maybe 20 minutes. Sorry, but I think that would 
help." 

I nodded and stood, pulling a jumper on over my shirt. "Thanks for 
stepping in," I said to Reiko. 

"Don't mention it," she said with a wink. "This is not your fault. Don’t 
worry, by the time you come back she'll be OK." 

My feet carried me down the road, which was illuminated by the 
oddly unreal light of the moon, and into the woods. 

Beneath that moonlight, all sounds bore a strange reverberation. The 
hollow sound of my own footsteps seemed to come from another 
direction as though I were hearing someone walking on the bottom of 
the sea. Behind me, every now and then, I would hear a crack or a 
rustle. A heavy pall hung over the forest, as if the animals of the night 
were holding their breath, waiting for me to pass. 

Where the road sloped upwards beyond the trees, I sat and looked 
towards the building where Naoko lived. It was easy to tell her room. 
All I had to do was find the one window towards the back where a 
faint light trembled. I focused on that point of light for a long, long 
time. It made me think of something like the final pulse of a soul's 
dying embers. I wanted to cup my hands over what was left and keep 
it alive. I went on watching it the way Jay Gatsby watched that tiny 
light on the opposite shore night after night. 

When I walked back to the front entrance of the building half an hour 
later, I could hear Reiko practising the guitar. I padded up the stairs 
and tapped on the door to the flat. Inside there was no sign of Naoko. 

 



Reiko sat alone on the carpet, playing her guitar. She pointed towards 
the bedroom door to let me know Naoko was in there. Then she set 
down the guitar on the floor and took a seat on the sofa, inviting me to 
sit next to her and dividing what wine was left between our two 
glasses. 

"Naoko is fine," she said, touching my knee. "Don't worry, all she has 
to do is rest for a while. She'll calm down. She was just a little worked 
up. How about taking a walk with me in the meantime?" 

"Good," I said. 

Reiko and I ambled down a road illuminated by street lamps. When 
we reached the area by the tennis and basketball courts, we sat on a 
bench. She picked up a basketball from under the bench and tinned it 
in her hands. Then she asked me if I played tennis. I knew how to 
play, I said, but I was bad at it. 

"How about basketball?" 

"Not my strongest sport," I said. 

"What is your strongest sport?" Reiko asked, wrinkling the corners of 
her eyes with a smile. "Aside from sleeping with girls." 

"I'm not so good at that, either," I said, stung by her words. "Just 
kidding," she said. "Don't get angry. But really, though, what are you 
good at?" 

"Nothing special. I have things I like to do." "For instance?" 

"Hiking. Swimming. Reading." 

"You like to do things alone, then?" 

"I guess so. I could never get excited about games you play with other 
people. I can't get into them. I lose interest." 

"Then you have to come here in the winter. We do crosscountry 
skiing. I'm sure you'd like that, tramping around in the snow all day, 
working up a good sweat." Under the street lamp, Reiko stared at her 
right hand as though she were inspecting an antique musical 
instrument. 

"Does Naoko often get like that?" I asked. 

 



"Every now and then," said Reiko, now looking at her left hand. 
"Every once in a while she'll get worked up and cry like that. But 
that's OK. She's letting out her feelings. The scary thing is not being 
able to do that. When your feelings build up and harden and die 
inside, then you're in big trouble." 

"Did I say something I shouldn’t have?" 

"Not a thing. Don't worry. Just speak your mind honestly That's the 
best thing. It may hurt a little sometimes, and someone may get upset 
the way Naoko did. but in the long run it's for the best. That's what 
you should do if you're serious about making Naoko well again. Like I 
told you in the beginning, you should think not so much about 
wanting to help her as wanting to recover yourself by helping her to 
recover. That's the way it's done here. So you have to be honest and 
say everything that comes to mind, while you're here at least. Nobody 
does that in the outside world, right?" 

"I guess not," I said. 

"I've seen all kinds of people come and go in my time here," she said, 
"maybe too many people. So I can usually tell by looking at a person 
whether they're going to get better or not, almost by instinct. But in 
Naoko's case. I'm not sure. I have absolutely no idea what's going to 
happen to her. For all I know, she could be 100 per cent recovered 
next month, or she could go on like this for years. So I really can't tell 
you what to do aside from the most generalized kind of advice: to be 
honest and help each other." 

"What makes Naoko such a hard case for you?" 

"Probably because I like her so much. I think my emotions get in the 
way and I can't see her clearly. I mean, I really like her. But aside 
from that, she has a bundle of different problems that are all tangled 
up with each other so that it's hard to unravel a single one. It may take 
a very long time to undo them all, or something could trigger them to 
come unravelled all at once. It's kind of like that. Which is why I can't 
be sure about her." 

 



She picked up the basketball again, twirled it in her hands and 
bounced it on the ground. 

"The most important thing is not to let yourself get impatient," Reiko 
said. "This is one more piece of advice I have for you: don't get 
impatient. Even if things are so tangled up you can't do anything, don't 
get desperate or blow a fuse and start yanking on one particular thread 
before it's ready to come undone. You have to realize it's going to be a 
long process and that you'll work on things slowly, one at a time. Do 
you think you can do that?" 

"I can try," I said. 

"It may take a very long time, you know, and even then she may not 
recover completely. Have you thought about that?" I nodded. 

"Waiting is hard," she said, bouncing the ball. "Especially for 
someone your age. You just sit and wait for her to get better. Without 
deadlines or guarantees. Do you think you can do that? Do you love 
Naoko that much ?" 

"I'm not sure," I said honestly. "Like Naoko, I'm not really sure what it 
means to love another person. Though she meant it a little differently. 
I do want to try my best, though. I have to, or else I won't know where 
to go. Like you said before, Naoko and I have to save each other. It's 
the only way for either of us to be saved." 

"And are you going to go on sleeping with girls you pick up?" 

"I don't know what to do about that either," I said. "What do you 
think? Should I just keep waiting and masturbating? I'm not in 
complete control there, either." 

Reiko set the ball on the ground and patted my knee. "Look," she said, 
"I'm not telling you to stop sleeping with girls. If you're OK with that, 
then it's OK. It's your life after all, it's something you have to decide. 
All I'm saying is you shouldn't use yourself up in some unnatural 
form. Do )ou see what I'm getting at? It would be such a waste. The 
years 19 and 20 are a crucial stage in the maturation of character, and 
if you allow yourself to become warped when you're that 

 



age, it will cause you pain when you're older. It's true. So think about 
it carefully. If you want to take care of Naoko, take care of yourself, 
too." 

I said I would think about it. 

"I was 20 myself. Once upon a time. Would you believe it?" 

"I believe it. Of course." 

"Deep down?" 

"Deep down," I said with a smile. 

"And I was cute, too. Not as cute as Naoko, but pretty damn cute. I 
didn't have all these wrinkles." 

I said I liked her wrinkles a lot. She thanked me. 

"But don’t ever tell another woman that you find her wrinkles 
attractive," she added. "I like to hear it, but I'm the exception." 

"I'll be careful," I said. 

She slipped a wallet from her trouser pocket and handed me a photo 
from the card-holder. It was a colour snapshot of a cute girl around ten 
years old wearing skis and a brightly coloured ski-suit, standing on the 
snow smiling sweetly for the camera. 

"Isn't she pretty? My daughter," said Reiko. "She sent me this in 
January. She's - what? - nine years old now." 

"She has your smile," I said, returning the photo. Reiko pocketed the 
wallet and. with a sniff, put a cigarette between her lips and lit up. 

"I was going to be a concert pianist," she said. "I had talent, and 
people recognized it and made a fuss over me while I was growing up. 
I won competitions and had top marks in the conservatoire, and I was 
all set to study in Germany after graduation. Not a cloud on the 
horizon. Everything worked out perfectly, and when it didn't there was 
always somebody to fix it. But then one day something happened, and 
it all blew apart. I was in my final year at the conservatoire and there 
was a fairly important competition coming up. I practised for it 
constantly, but all of a sudden the little finger of my left hand stopped 
moving. I don’t know why, but it just did. I tried massaging it, soaking 

 



it in hot water, taking a few days off from practice: nothing worked. 
So then I got scared and went to the doctor's. They tried all kinds of 
tests but they couldn’t come up with anything. There was nothing 
wrong with the finger itself, and the nerves were OK, they said: there 
was no reason it should stop moving. The problem must be 
psychological. So I went to a psychiatrist, but he didn't really know 
what was going on, either. Probably pre-competition stress, he said, 
and advised me to get away from the piano for a while." 

Reiko inhaled deeply and let the smoke out. Then she bent her neck to 
the side a few times. 

"So I went to recuperate at my grandmother's place on the coast in Izu. 
I thought I'd forget about that particular competition and really relax, 
spend a couple of weeks away from the piano doing anything I 
wanted. But it was hopeless. Piano was all I could think about. Maybe 
my finger would never move again. How would I live if that 
happened? The same thoughts kept going round and round in my 
brain. And no wonder: piano had been my whole life up to that point. I 
had started playing when I was four and grew up thinking about the 
piano and nothing else. I never did housework so as not to injure my 
fingers. People paid attention to me for that one thing: my talent at the 
piano. Take the piano away from a girl who's grown up like that, and 
what's left? So then, snap! MY mind became a complete jumble. Total 
darkness." 

She dropped her cigarette to the ground and stamped it out, then bent 
her neck a few times again. 

"That was the end of my dream of becoming a concert pianist. I spent 
two months in the hospital. My finger started to move shortly after I 
arrived, so I was able to return to the conservatoire and graduate, but 
something inside me had vanished. Some jewel of energy or 
something had disappeared - evaporated - from inside my body. The 
doctor said I lacked the mental strength to become a professional 
pianist and advised me to abandon the idea. So after graduating I took 

 



pupils and taught them at home. But the pain I felt was excruciating. It 
was as if my life had ended. Here I was in my early twenties and the 
best part of my life was over. Do you see how terrible that would be? I 
had such potential, then woke up one day and it had gone. No more 
applause, no one would make a big fuss over me. no one would tell 
me how wonderful I was. I spent day after day in the house teaching 
neighbourhood children Beyer exercises and sonatinas. I felt so 
miserable, I cried all the time. To think what I had missed! I would 
hear about people who were far less talented than me winning second 
place in a competition or holding a recital in such-and-such a hall, and 
the tears would pour out of me. 

"My parents walked around on tiptoe, afraid of hurting me. But I 
knew how disappointed they were. All of a sudden the daughter they 
had been so proud of was an ex-mental-patient. They couldn't even 
marry me off. When you're living with people, you sense what they're 
feeling, and I hated it. I was afraid to go out, afraid the neighbours 
were talking about me. So then, snap! It happened again - the jumble, 
the darkness. It happened when I was 24, and this time I spent seven 
months in a sanatorium. Not this place: a regular insane asylum with 
high walls and locked gates. A filthy place without pianos. I didn’t 
know what to do with myself. All I knew was I wanted to get out of 
there as soon as I could, so I straggled desperately to get better. Seven 
months: a long seven months. That's when my wrinkles started." 

Reiko smiled, her lips stretching from side to side. 

"I hadn't been out of the hospital for long when I met a man and got 
married. He was a year younger than me, an engineer who worked in 
an aeroplane manufacturing company, and one of my pupils. A nice 
man. He didn't say a lot, but he was warm and sincere. He had been 
taking lessons from me for six months when all of a sudden he asked 
me to marry him. Just like that - one day when we were having tea 
after his lesson. Can you believe it? We had never dated or held 
hands. He took me totally off guard. I told him I couldn't get married. 

 



I said I liked him and thought he was a nice person but that, for certain 
reasons, I couldn’t marry him. He wanted to know what those reasons 
were, so I explained everything to him with complete honesty - that I 
had been hospitalized twice for mental breakdowns. I told him 
everything - what the cause had been, my condition, and the 
possibility that it could happen again. He said he needed time to think, 
and I encouraged him to take all the time he needed. But when he 
came for his lesson a week later, he said he still wanted to marry me. I 
asked him to wait three months. We would see each other for three 
months, I said, and if he still wanted to marry me at that point, we 
would talk about it again. 

"We dated once a week for three months. We went everywhere, and 
talked about everything, and I got to like him a lot. When I was with 
him, I felt as if my life had finally come back to me. It gave me a 
wonderful sense of relief to be alone with him: I could forget all those 
terrible things that had happened. So what if I hadn't been able to 
become a concert pianist? So what if I had spent time in mental 
hospitals? My life hadn't ended. Life was still full of wonderful things 
I hadn't experienced. If only for having made me feel that way, I felt 
tremendously grateful to him. After three months went by, he asked 
me again to marry him. And this is what I said to him: "If you want to 
sleep with me, I don't mind. I've never slept with anybody, and I'm 
very fond of you, so if you want to make love to me, I don't mind at 
all. But marrying me is a whole different matter. If you marry me, you 
take on all my troubles, and they're a lot worse than you can imagine. 
"He said he didn't care, that he didn't just want to sleep with me, he 
wanted to marry me, to share everything I had inside me. And he 
meant it. He was the kind of person who would only say what he 
really meant, and do anything he said. So I agreed to marry him. It 
was all I could do. We got married, let's see, four months later I think 
it was. He fought with his parents over me, and they disowned him. 
He was from an old family that lived in a rural part of Shikoku. They 

 



had my background investigated and found out that I had been 
hospitalized twice. No wonder they opposed the marriage. So, 
anyway, we didn't have a wedding ceremony. We just went to the 
registry office and registered our marriage and took a trip to Hakone 
for two nights. That was plenty for us: we were happy. And finally, I 
remained a virgin until the day I married. I was 25 years old! Can you 
believe it?" 

Reiko sighed and picked up the basketball again. 

"I thought that as long as I was with him, I would be all right," she 
went on. "As long as I was with him, my troubles would stay away. 
That’s the most important thing for a sickness like ours: a sense of 
trust. If I put myself in this person's hands. I'll be OK. If my condition 
starts to worsen even the slightest bit - if a screw comes loose - he'll 
notice straight away, and with tremendous care and patience he'll fix 
it, he'll tighten the screw again, put all the jumbled threads back in 
place. If we have that sense of trust, our sickness stays away. No more 
snap! I was so happy! Life was great! I felt as if someone had pulled 
me out of a cold, raging sea and wrapped me in a blanket and laid me 
in a warm bed. I had a baby two years after we were married, and then 
my hands were really full! I practically forgot about my sickness. I’d 
get up in the morning and do the housework and take care of the baby 
and feed my husband when he came home from work. It was the same 
thing day after day, but I was happy. It was probably the happiest time 
of my life. How many years did it last, I wonder? At least until I was . And then, all of a sudden, snap! It happened again. I fell apart." 
Reiko lit a cigarette. The wind had died down. The smoke rose 
straight up and disappeared into the darkness of night. Just then I 
realized that the sky was filled with stars. 

"Something happened?" I asked. 

"Yes," she said, "something very strange, as if a trap had been laid for 
me. Even now, it gives me a chill just to think about it." Reiko rubbed 
a temple with her free hand. "I'm sorry, though, making you listen to 

 



all this talk about me. You came here to see Naoko, not listen to my 
story." 

"I'd really like to hear it, though," I said. "If you don't mind. I'd like to 
hear the rest." 

"Well," Reiko began, "when our daughter entered kindergarten, I 
started playing again, little by little. Not for anyone else, but for 
myself. I started with short pieces by Bach, Mozart, Scarlatti. After 
such a long blank period, of course, my feel for the music didn’t come 
back straight away. And my fingers wouldn't move the way they used 
to. But I was thrilled to be playing the piano again. With my hands on 
the keys, I realized how much I had loved music - and how much I 
hungered for it. To be able to perform music for yourself is a 
wonderful thing. 

"As I said before, I had been playing from the time I was four years 
old, but it occurred to me that I had never once played for myself. I 
had always been trying to pass a test or practise an assignment or 
impress somebody. Those are all important things, of course, if you 
are going to master an instrument. But after a certain age you have to 
start performing for yourself. That’s what music is. I had to drop out of 
the elite course and pass my thirty-first birthday before I was finally 
able to see that. I would send my child off to kindergarten and hurry 
through the housework, then spend an hour or two playing music I 
liked. So far so good, right?" 

I nodded. 

"Then one day I had a visit from one of the ladies of the 
neighbourhood, someone I at least knew well enough to say hello to 
on the street, asking me to give her daughter piano lessons. I didn't 
know the daughter - although we lived in the same general 
neighbourhood our houses were still pretty far apart - but according to 
the woman, her daughter used to pass my house and loved to hear me 
play. She had seen me at some point, too, and now she was pestering 
her mother to let me teach her. She was in her fourth year of school 

 



and had taken lessons from a number of people but things had not 
gone well for one reason or another and now she had no teacher. 

"I turned her down. I had had that blank of several years, and while it 
might have made sense for me to take on an absolute beginner, it 
would have been impossible for me to pick up with someone who had 
had lessons for a number of years. Besides, I was too busy taking care 
of my own child and. though I didn’t say this to the woman, nobody 
can deal with the kind of child who changes teachers constantly. So 
then the woman asked me to at least do her daughter the favour of 
meeting her once. She was a fairly pushy lady and I could see she was 
not going to let me off the hook that easily, so I agreed to meet the girl 
- but just meet her. Three days later the girl came to the house by 
herself. She was an absolute angel, with a kind of pure, sweet, 
transparent beauty. I had never - and have never - seen such a 
beautiful little girl. She had long, shiny hair as black as freshly ground 
Indian ink, slim, graceful arms and legs, bright eyes, and a soft little 
mouth that looked as if someone had just made it. I couldn’t speak 
when I first saw her, she was so beautiful. Sitting on my sofa, she 
turned my living room into a gorgeous parlour. It hurt to look directly 
at her: I had to squint. So, anyway, that's what she was like. I can still 
picture her clearly." 

Reiko narrowed her eyes as if she were actually picturing the girl. 

"Over coffee we talked for a whole hour - talked about all kinds of 
things: music, her school, just everything. I could see straight away 
she was a smart one. She knew how to hold a conversation: she had 
clear, shrewd opinions and a natural gift for drawing out the other 
person. It was almost frightening. Exactly what it was that made her 
frightening, I couldn't tell at the time. It just struck me how 
frighteningly intelligent she was. But in her presence I lost any normal 
powers of judgement I might have had. She was so young and 
beautiful, I felt overwhelmed to the point where I saw myself as an 
inferior specimen, a clumsy excuse for a human being who could only 

 



have negative thoughts about her because of my own warped and 
filthy mind." 

Reiko shook her head several times. 

"If I were as pretty and smart as she was. I'd have been 
a normal human being. What more could you want if you were that 
smart and that beautiful? Why would you have to torment and walk all 
over your weaker inferiors if everybody loved you so much? What 
reason could there possibly be for acting that way?" 

"Did she do something terrible to you?" 

"Well, let me just say the girl was a pathological liar. She was sick, 
pine and simple. She made up everything. And while she was making 
up her stories, she would come to believe them. And then she would 
change things around her to fit her story. She had such a quick mind, 
she could always keep a step ahead of you and take care of things that 
would ordinarily strike you as odd. so it would never cross your mind 
she was lying. First of all, no one would ever suspect that such a pretty 
little girl would lie about the most ordinary things. I certainly didn't. 
She told me tons of lies for six months before I had the slightest 
inkling anything was wrong. She lied about everything, and I never 
suspected. I know it sounds crazy." 

"What did she lie about?" 

"When I say everything, I mean everything." Reiko gave a sarcastic 
laugh. "When people tell a lie about something, they have to make up 
a bunch of lies to go with the first one. ’Mythomania’ is the word for it. 
When the usual mythomaniac tells lies, they're usually the innocent 
kind, and most people notice. But not with that girl. To protect herself, 
she’d tell hurtful lies without batting an eyelid. She'd use everything 
she could get her hands on. And she would lie either more or less 
depending on who she was talking to. To her mother or close friends 
who would know straight away, she hardly ever lied, or if she had to 
tell one, she'd be really, really careful to tell lies that wouldn't come 
out. Or if they did come out, she’d find an excuse or apologize in that 

 



clingy voice of hers with tears pouring out of her beautiful eyes. No 
one could stay mad at her then. 

"I still don't know why she chose me. Was I another victim to her, or a 
source of salvation? I just don't know. Of course, it hardly matters 
now. Now that everything is over. Now that I'm like this." 

A short silence followed. 

"She repeated what her mother had told me, that she had been moved 
when she heard me playing as she passed the house. She had seen me 
on the street a few times, too, and had begun to worship me. She 
actually used that word: "worship'. It made me turn bright red. I mean, 
to be "worshipped' by such a beautiful little doll of a girl! I don't think 
it was an absolute lie, though. I was in my thirties already, of course, 
and I could never be as beautiful and bright as she was, and I had no 
special talent, but I must have had something that drew her to me, 
something that was missing in her, I suppose. That must have been 
what got her interested in me to begin with. I believe that now, 
looking back. And I'm not boasting." 

"No, I think I know what you mean." 

"She had brought some music with her and asked if she could play for 
me. So I let her. It was a Bach invention. Her performance was .. 
interesting. Or should I say strange? It just wasn't ordinary. Of course 
it wasn't polished. She hadn't been going to a professional school, and 
what lessons she had taken had been an on-and-off kind of thing; she 
was very much self-taught. Her sound was untrained. She'd have been 
rejected immediately at a music-school audition. But she made it 
work. Although 90 per cent was just terrible, the other 10 per cent was 
there: she made it sing: it was music. And this was a Bach invention! 
So I got interested in her. I wanted to know what she was all about. 
"Needless to say, the world is full of kids who can play Bach far better 
than she could. Twenty times better. But most of their performances 
would have nothing to them. They’d be hollow, empty. This girl's 
technique was bad, but she had that little bit of something that could 

 



draw people - or draw me, at least - into her performance. So I decided 
it might be worthwhile to teach her. Of course, retraining her at that 
point to where she could become a pro was out of the question. But I 
felt it might be possible to make her into the kind of happy pianist I 
was then - and still am - someone who could enjoy making music for 
herself. This turned out to be an empty hope, though. She was not the 
kind of person who quietly goes about doing things for herself. This 
was a child who would make detailed calculations to use every means 
at her disposal to impress other people. She knew exactly what she 
had to do to make people admire and praise her. And she knew exactly 
what kind of performance it would take to draw me in. She had 
calculated everything. I'm sure, and put everything she had into 
practising the most important passages over and over again for my 
benefit. I can see her doing it. 

"Still, even now, after all of this came clear to me, I believe it was a 
wonderful performance and I would feel the same chills down my 
spine if I could hear it again. Knowing all I know about her flaws, her 
cunning and lies, I would still feel it. I'm telling you, there are such 
things in this world." 

Reiko cleared her throat with a dry rasp and broke off. 

"So, did you take her as a pupil?" I asked. 

"Yeah. One lesson a week. Saturday mornings. Saturday was a day off 
at her school. She never missed a lesson, she was never late, she was 
an ideal pupil. She always practised for her lessons. After every 
lesson, we'd have some cake and chat." 

At that point, Reiko looked at her watch as if suddenly remembering 
something. 

"Don't you think we should be getting back to the room? I'm a little 
worried about Naoko. I'm sure you haven't forgotten about her now, 
have you?" 

"Of course not," I laughed. "It's just that I was drawn into your story." 
"If you’d like to hear the rest. I'll tell it to you tomorrow. It's a long 

 



story - too long for one sitting." "You're a regular Scheherazade." 

"I know," she said, joining her laughter with mine. "You'll never get 
back to Tokyo." 

We retraced our steps through the path in the woods and returned to 
the flat. The candles had been extinguished and the living room lights 
were out. The bedroom door was open and the lamp on the night table 
was on, its pale light spilling into the living room. Naoko sat alone on 
the sofa in the gloom. She had changed into a loose-fitting blue gown, 
its collar pulled tight about her neck, her legs folded under her on the 
sofa. Reiko approached her and rested a hand on her crown. 

"Are you all right now?" 

"I'm fine. Sorry," answered Naoko in a tiny voice. Then she turned 
towards me and repeated her apology. "I must have scared you." 

"A little," I said with a smile. 

"Come here," she said. When I sat down next to her, Naoko, her legs 
still folded, leaned towards me until her face was nearly touching my 
ear, as though she were about to share a secret with me. Then she 
planted a soft kiss by my ear. 

"Sorry," she said once more, this time directly into my ear, her voice 
subdued. Then she moved away from me. 

"Sometimes," she said, "I get so confused, I don't know what's 
happening." 

"That happens to me all the time," I said. 

Naoko smiled and looked at me. 

"If you don't mind." I said. "I’d like to hear more about you. About 
your life here. What you do every day. The people you meet." 

Naoko talked about her daily routine in this place, speaking in short 
but crystal clear phrases. Wake up at six in the morning. Breakfast in 
the flat. Clean out the aviary. Then usually farm work. She took care 
of the vegetables. Before or after lunch, she would have either an 
hour-long session with her doctor or a group discussion. In the 
afternoon she could choose from among courses that might interest 

 



her, outside work, or sports. She had taken several courses: French, 
knitting, piano, ancient history. 

"Reiko is teaching me piano," she said. "She also teaches guitar. We 
all take turns as pupils or teachers. Somebody with fluent French 
teaches French, one person who used to be in social studies teaches 
history, another good at knitting teaches knitting: that's a pretty 
impressive school right there. Unfortunately, I don’t have anything I 
can teach anyone." 

"Neither do I," I said. 

"I put a lot more energy into my studies here than I ever did in 
university. I work hard and enjoy it - a lot." 

"What do you do after supper?" 

"Talk with Reiko, read, listen to records, go to other people's flats and 
play games, stuff like that." 

"I do guitar practice and write my autobiography," said Reiko. 
"Autobiography?" 

"Just kidding," Reiko laughed. "We go to bed around ten. Pretty 
healthy lifestyle, wouldn't you say? We sleep like babies." 

I looked at my watch. It was a few minutes before nine. "I guess you'll 
be getting sleepy soon." 

"That's OK. We can stay up late today," said Naoko. "I haven't seen 
you in such a long time, I want to talk more. So talk." 

"When I was alone before, all of a sudden I started thinking about the 
old days," I said. "Do you remember when Kizuki and I came to visit 
you at the hospital? The one on the seashore. I think it was the first 
year of the sixth-form." 

"When I had the chest operation," Naoko said with a smile. "Sure, I 
remember. You and Kizuki came on a motorbike. You brought me a 
box of chocolates and they were all melted together. They were so 
hard to eat! I don’t know, it seems like such a long time ago." 

"Yeah, really. I think you were writing a poem then, a long one." 

"All girls write poems at that age," Naoko tittered. "What reminded 

 



you of that all of a sudden?" 

"I wonder. The smell of the sea wind, the oleanders: before I knew it, 
they just popped into my head. Did Kizuki come to see you at the 
hospital a lot?" 

"No way! We had a big fight about that afterwards. He came once, 
and then he came with you, and that was it for him. He was terrible. 
And that first time he couldn’t sit still and he only stayed about ten 
minutes. He brought me some oranges and mumbled all this stuff I 
couldn’t understand, and he peeled an orange for me and mumbled 
more stuff and he was out of there. He said he had a thing about 
hospitals." 

Naoko laughed. "He was always a kid about that kind of stuff. I mean, 
nobody likes hospitals, right? That's why people visit people in 
hospitals to make them feel better, and perk up their spirits and stuff. 
But Kizuki just didn’t get it." 

"He wasn't so bad when the two of us came to see you, though. He 
was just his usual self." 

"Because you were there," said Naoko. "He was always like that 
around you. He struggled to keep his weaknesses hidden. I'm sure he 
was very fond of you. He made a point of letting you see only his best 
side. He wasn't like that with me. He'd let his guard down. He could 
be really moody. One minute he’d be chattering away, and the next 
he'd be depressed. It happened all the time. He was like that from the 
time he was little. He did keep trying to change himself, to improve 
himself, though." 

Naoko re-crossed her legs on the sofa. 

"He tried hard, but it didn’t do any good, and that would make him 
really angry and sad. There was so much about him that was fine and 
beautiful, but he could never find the confidence he needed. "I've got 
to do that. I've got to change this,' he was always thinking, right up to 
the end. Poor Kizuki!" 

"Still," I said, "if it's true that he was always straggling to show me his 

 



best side. I'd say he succeeded. His best side was all that I could see." 
Naoko smiled. "He'd be thrilled if he could hear you say that. You 
were his only friend." 

"And Kizuki was my only friend," I said. "There was never anybody I 
could really call a friend, before him or after him." 

"That's why I loved being with the two of you. His best side was all 
that I could see then, too. I could relax and stop worrying when the 
three of us were together. Those were my favourite times. I don't 
know how you felt about it." 

"I used to worry about what you were thinking," I said, giving my 
head a shake. 

"The problem was that that kind of thing couldn’t go on for ever," said 
Naoko. "Such perfect little circles are impossible to maintain. Kizuki 
knew it, and I knew it, and so did you. Am I right?" 

I nodded. 

"To tell you the truth, though," Naoko went on, "I loved his weak side, 
too. I loved it as much as I loved his good side. There was absolutely 
nothing mean or underhand about him. He was weak: that's all. I tried 
to tell him that, but he wouldn't believe me. He’d always tell me it was 
because we had been together since we were three. I knew him too 
well, he'd say: I couldn't tell the difference between his strong points 
and his flaws, they were all the same to me. He couldn’t change my 
mind about him, though. I went on loving him just the same, and I 
could never be interested in anyone else." 

Naoko looked at me with a sad smile. 

"Our boy-girl relationship was really unusual, too. It was as if we 
were physically joined somewhere. If we happened to be apart, some 
special gravitational force would pull us back together again. It was 
the most natural thing in the world when we became boyfriend and 
girlfriend. It was nothing we had to think about or make any choices 
about. We started kissing at 12 and petting at 13. I'd go to his room or 

 



he'd come to my room and I’d finish him off with my hands. It never 
occurred to me that we were being precocious. It just happened as a 
matter of course. If he wanted to play with my breasts or pussy, I 
didn’t mind at all, or if he had cum he wanted to get rid of, I didn’t 
mind helping him with that, either. I'm sure it would have shocked us 
both if someone had accused us of doing anything wrong. Because we 
weren't. 

We were just doing what we were supposed to do. We had always 
shown each other every part of our bodies. It was almost as if we 
owned each other's bodies jointly. For a while, at least, we made sure 
we didn’t go any further than that, though. We were afraid of my 
getting pregnant, and had almost no idea at that point of how to go 
about preventing it ... Anyway, that's how Kizuki and I grew up 
together, hand in hand, an inseparable pair. We had almost no sense of 
the oppressiveness of sex or the anguish that comes with the sudden 
swelling of the ego that ordinary kids experience when they reach 
puberty. We were totally open about sex, and where our egos were 
concerned, the way we absorbed and shared each other's, we had no 
strong awareness of them. Do you see what I mean?" 

"I think so," I said. 

"We couldn't bear to be apart. So if Kizuki had lived. I’m sure we 
would have been together, loving each other, and gradually growing 
unhappy." 

"Unhappy? Why’s that?" 

With her fingers, Naoko combed her hair back several times. She had 
taken her hairslide off, which made the hair fall over her face when 
she dropped her head forward. 

"Because we would have had to pay the world back what we owed it," 
she said, raising her eyes to mine. "The pain of growing up. We didn’t 
pay when we should have, so now the bills are due. Which is why 
Kizuki did what he did, and why I’m here. We were like kids who 
grew up naked on a desert island. If we got hungry, we’d just pick a 

 



banana; if we got lonely, we'd go to sleep in each other's arms. But 
that kind of thing doesn't last for ever. We grew up fast and had to 
enter society. Which is why you were so important to us. You were 
the link connecting us with the outside. We were straggling through 
you to fit in with the outside world as best we could. In the end. it 
didn't work, of course." 

I nodded. 

"I wouldn’t want you to think that we were using you, though. Kizuki 
really loved you. It just so happened that our connection with you was 
our first connection with anyone else. And it still is. Kizuki may be 
dead, but you are still My only link with the outside world. And just as 
Kizuki loved you, I love you. We never meant to hurt you, but we 
probably did; we probably ended up making a deep wound in your 
heart. It never occurred to us that anything like that might happen." 
Naoko lowered her head again and fell silent. 

"Hey, how about a cup of cocoa?" suggested Reiko. 

"Good. I'd really like some," said Naoko. 

"I'd like to have some of that brandy I brought, if you don't mind," I 
said. 

"Oh, absolutely," said Reiko. "Could I have a sip?" "Sure," I said, 
laughing. 

Reiko brought out two glasses and we toasted each other. Then she 
went into the kitchen to make cocoa. 

"Can we talk about something a little more cheerful?" asked Naoko. 

I didn’t have anything cheerful to talk about. I thought. If only Storm 
Trooper were still around! That guy could inspire a string of stories. A 
few of those would have made everybody feel good. The best I could 
do was talk at length about the filthy habits of the guys in the 
dormitory. I felt sick just talking about something so gross, but Naoko 
and Reiko practically fell over laughing, it was all so new to them. 
Next Reiko did imitations of mental patients. This was a lot of fun, 
too. Naoko started looking sleepy after eleven o'clock, so Reiko let 

 



down the sofa back and handed me a pillow, sheets and blankets. 

"If you feel like raping anybody in the middle of the night, don't get 
the wrong one," she said. "The unwrinkled body in the left bed is 
Naoko’s." 

"Liar! Mine's the right bed," said Naoko. 

Reiko added, "By the way, I arranged for us to skip some of our 
afternoon schedule. Why don't the three of us have a little picnic? I 
know a really nice place close by." 

"Good idea," I said. 

The women took turns brushing their teeth and withdrew to the 
bedroom. I poured myself some brandy and stretched out on the sofa 
bed, going over the day's events from morning to night. It felt like an 
awfully long day. The room continued to glow white in the moonlight. 
Aside from the occasional slight creak of a bed, hardly a sound came 
from the bedroom where Naoko and Reiko lay sleeping. Tiny 
diagrammatic shapes seemed to float in the darkness when I closed 
my eyes, and my ears sensed the lingering reverberation of Reiko's 
guitar, but neither of these lasted for long. Sleep came and carried me 
into a mass of warm mud. I dreamed of willows. Both sides of a 
mountain road were lined with willows. An incredible number of 
willows. A fairly stiff breeze was blowing, but the branches of the 
willow trees never swayed. Why should that be? I wondered, and then 
I saw that every branch of every tree had tiny birds clinging to it. 
Their weight kept the branches from stirring. I grabbed a stick and hit 
a nearby branch with it, hoping to chase away the birds and allow the 
branch to sway. But they would not leave. Instead of flying away, they 
turned into bird-shaped metal chunks that crashed to the ground. 

When I opened my eyes, I felt as if I were seeing the continuation of 
my dream. The moonlight filled the room with the same soft white 
glow. As if by reflex, I sat up in bed and started searching for the 
metal birds, which of course were not there. What I saw instead was 
Naoko at the foot of the bed, sitting still and alone, staring out through 

 



the window. She had drawn her knees up and was resting her chin on 
them, looking like a hungry orphan. I searched for the watch I had left 
by my pillow, but it was not in the place where I knew it should be. I 
guessed from the angle of the moonlight that the time must be two or 
three o'clock in the morning. I felt a violent thirst but I decided to keep 
still and continue watching Naoko. She was wearing the same blue 
nightdress I had seen her in earlier, and on one side her hair was held 
in place by the butterfly hairslide, revealing the beauty of her face in 
the moonlight. Strange, I thought, she had taken the slide off before 
going to bed. 

Naoko stayed frozen in place, like a small nocturnal animal that has 
been lured out by the moonlight. The direction of the glow 
exaggerated the silhouette of her lips. Seeming utterly fragile and 
vulnerable, the silhouette pulsed almost imperceptibly with the 
beating of her heart or the motions of her inner heart, as if she were 
whispering soundless words to the darkness. 

I swallowed in hopes of easing my thirst, but in the stillness of the 
night the sound I made was huge. As if this were a signal to her, 
Naoko stood and glided towards the head of the bed, gown rustling 
faintly. She knelt on the floor by my pillow, eyes fixed on mine. I 
stared back at her, but her eyes told me nothing. Strangely transparent, 
they seemed like windows to a world beyond, but however long I 
peered into their depths, there was nothing I could see. Our faces were 
no more than ten inches apart, but she was light years away from me. 

I reached out and tried to touch her, but Naoko drew back, lips 
trembling faintly. A moment later, she brought her hands 
up and began slowly to undo the buttons of her gown. There were 
seven in all. I felt as if it were the continuation of my dream as I 
watched her slim, lovely fingers opening the buttons one by one from 
top to bottom. Seven small, white buttons: when she had unfastened 
them all, Naoko slipped the gown from her shoulders and threw it off 
completely like an insect shedding its skin. She had been wearing 

 



nothing under the gown. All she had on was the butterfly hairslide. 
Naked now, and still kneeling by the bed, she looked at me. Bathed in 
the soft light of the moon, Naoko's body had the heartbreaking lustre 
of newborn flesh. When she moved - and she did so almost 
imperceptibly - the play of light and shadow on her body shifted 
subtly. The swelling roundness of her breasts, her tiny nipples, the 
indentation of her navel, her hipbones and pubic hair, all cast grainy 
shadows, the shapes of which kept changing like ripples spreading 
over the calm surface of a lake. 

What perfect flesh! I thought. When had Naoko come to possess such 
a perfect body? What had happened to the body I held in my arms that 
night last spring? 

A sense of imperfection had been what Naoko's body had given me 
that night as I tenderly undressed her while she cried. Her breasts had 
seemed hard, the nipples oddly jutting, the hips strangely rigid. She 
was a beautiful girl, of course, her body marvellous and alluring. It 
aroused me that night and swept me along with a gigantic force. But 
still, as I held her and caressed her and kissed her naked flesh, I felt a 
strange and powerful awareness of the imbalance and awkwardness of 
the human body. Holding Naoko in my arms, I wanted to explain to 
her, "I am having sex with you now. I am inside you. But really this is 
nothing. It doesn't matter. It is nothing but the joining of two bodies. 
All we are doing is telling each other things that can only be told by 
the rubbing together of two imperfect lumps of flesh. By doing this, 
we are sharing our imperfection." But of course I could never have 
said such a thing with any hope of being understood. I just went on 
holding her tightly. And as I did so, I was able to feel inside her body 
some kind of stony foreign matter, something extra that I could never 
draw close to. And that sensation both filled my heart for Naoko and 
gave my erection a terrifying intensity. 

The body that Naoko revealed before me now, though, was nothing 
like the one I had held that night. This flesh had been through many 

 



changes to be reborn in utter perfection beneath the light of the moon. 
All signs of girlish plumpness had been stripped away since Kizuki's 
death to be replaced by the flesh of a mature woman. So perfect was 
Naoko's physical beauty now that it aroused nothing sexual in me. I 
could only stare, astounded, at the lovely curve from waist to hips, the 
rounded richness of the breasts, the gentle movement with each breath 
of the slim belly and the soft, black pubic shadow beneath. 

She exposed her nakedness to me this way for perhaps five minutes 
until, at last, she wrapped herself in her gown once more and buttoned 
it from top to bottom. As soon as the final button was in place, she 
rose and glided towards the bedroom, silently opened the door, and 
disappeared. 

I stayed rooted to the spot for a very long time until it occurred to me 
to leave the bed. I retrieved my watch from where it had fallen on the 
floor and turned it towards the light of the moon. It was 3.40.1 went to 
the kitchen and drank a few glasses of water before stretching out in 
bed again, but sleep never came until the morning sunlight crept into 
every corner of the room, dissolving all traces of the moon's pale 
glow. 

I was somewhere on the edge of sleep when Reiko came and slapped 
me on the cheek, shouting, "Morning! Morning!" 

While Reiko straightened out my sofa bed, Naoko went to the kitchen 
and started making breakfast. She smiled at me and said "Good 
morning". 

"Good morning," I replied. I stood by and watched her as she put on 
water to boil and sliced some bread, humming all the while, but I 
could sense nothing in her manner to suggest that she had revealed her 
naked body to me the night before. 

"Your eyes are red," she said to me as she poured the coffee. "Are you 
OK?" 

"I woke up in the middle of the night and couldn't get back to sleep." 

"I bet we were snoring," said Reiko. 

 



"Not at all," I said. 

"That's good," said Naoko. 

"He's just being polite," said Reiko, yawning. 

At first I thought that Naoko was embarrassed or acting innocent for 
Reiko, but her behaviour remained unchanged when Reiko 
momentarily left the room, and her eyes had their usual transparent 
look. 

"How’d you sleep?" I asked Naoko. 

"Like a log," she answered with ease. She wore a simple hairpin 
without any kind of decoration. 

I didn't know what to make of this, and I continued to feel that way all 
through breakfast. Buttering my bread or peeling my egg, I kept 
glancing across the table at Naoko, in search of a sign. 

"Why do you keep looking at me like that?" she asked with a smile. 

"I think he’s in love with somebody," said Reiko. 

"Are you in love with somebody?" Naoko asked me. 

"Could be," I said, returning her smile. When the two women started 
joking around at my expense, I gave up trying to think about what had 
happened in the night and concentrated on my bread and coffee. 

After breakfast, Reiko and Naoko said they would be going to feed the 
birds in the aviary. I volunteered to go along. They changed into jeans 
and work shirts and white rubber boots. Set in a little park behind the 
tennis courts, the aviary had everything in it from chickens and 
pigeons to peacocks and parrots and was surrounded by flowerbeds, 
shrubberies and benches. Two men in their forties, also apparently 
sanatorium patients, were raking up leaves that had fallen in the 
pathways. The women walked over to say good morning to the pair, 
and Reiko made them laugh with another of her jokes. Cosmos were 
blooming in the flowerbeds, and the shrubberies were extremely well 
manicured. Spotting Reiko, the birds started chattering and flying 
about inside the cage. 

The women entered the shed by the cage and came out with a bag of 

 



feed and a garden hose. Naoko screwed the hose to a tap and turned 
on the water. Taking care to prevent any birds from flying out, the two 
of them slipped into the cage, Naoko hosing down the dirt and Reiko 
scrubbing the floor of the cage with a deck brush. The spray sparkled 
in the glare of the morning sun. The peacocks flapped around the cage 
to avoid getting splashed. A turkey raised its head and glowered at me 
like a crotchety old man, while a parrot on the perch above screeched 
its displeasure and beat its wings. Reiko meowed at the parrot, which 
slunk over to the far corner but soon was calling: "Thank you!" 
"Crazy!" "Shithead!" 

"I wonder who taught him that kind of language?" said Naoko with a 
sigh. 

"Not me," said Reiko. "I would never do such a thing." She started 
meowing again, and the parrot shut up. 

Laughing, Reiko explained, "This guy once had a run-in with a cat. 
Now he's scared to death of them." 

When they had finished cleaning, the two set down their tools and 
went around filling each of the feeders. Splashing its way through 
puddles on the floor, the turkey darted to its feed box and plunged its 
head in, too obsessed with eating to be bothered by Naoko's smacks 
on its tail. 

"Do you do this every morning?" I asked Naoko. 

"Every morning!" she said. "They usually give this job to new women. 
It's so easy. Like to see the rabbits?" 

"Sure," I said. The rabbit hutch was behind the aviary. Some ten 
rabbits lay inside, asleep in the straw. Naoko swept up their droppings, 
put feed in their box, and picked up one of the babies, nibbing it 
against her cheek. 

"Isn't it precious?" she gushed. She let me hold it. The warm, little ball 
of fur cringed in my arms, twitching its nose. 

"Don't worry, he won't hurt you," she said to the rabbit, stroking its 
head with her finger and smiling at me. It was such a radiant smile. 

 



without a trace of shadow, that I couldn’t help smiling myself. And 
what about Naoko last night? I wondered. I knew for certain that it 
had been the real Naoko and not a dream: she had definitely taken her 
clothes off and shown her naked body to me. 

Reiko whistled a lovely rendition of "Proud Mary" as she stuffed a 
plastic bag with the debris they had gathered and tied the opening. I 
helped them carry the tools and feed bag to the shed. 

"Morning is my favourite time of day," said Naoko. "It's like 
everything's starting out fresh and new. I begin to get sad around noon 
time, and I hate it when the sun goes down. I live with those same 
feelings clay aster day. 

"And while you're living with those feelings, you youngsters get old 
just like me," said Reiko with a smile. "You're thinking about how it's 
morning now or night and the next thing you know, you're old." 

"But you like getting old," said Naoko. 

"Not really," said Reiko. "But I sure don't wish I was young again." 
"Why not?" I asked. 

"Because it's such a pain in the neck!" she said. Then she tossed her 
broom in and closed the door of the shed, whistling "Proud Mary" all 
the while. 

Back at the flat, the women changed their boots for tennis shoes and 
said they were going to the farm. Reiko suggested I stayed behind 
with a book or something because the work would be no fun to watch 
and they would be doing it as part of a group. "And while you're 
waiting you can wash the pile of dirty underwear we left by the sink," 
she added. 

"You're kidding," I said, taken aback. 

"Of course I am," she laughed. "You're so sweet. Isn’t he, Naoko?" 

"He really is," said Naoko, laughing with her. 

"I'll work on my German," I said with a sigh. 

"Yeah, do your homework like a good boy," said Reiko. 

 



"We'll be back before lunch." 

The two of them went out tittering. I heard the footsteps and voices of 
a number of people walking by downstairs. 

I went into the bathroom and washed my face again, then borrowed a 
nail clipper and trimmed my nails. For a bathroom that was being 
shared by two women, its contents were incredibly simple. Aside from 
some neatly arranged bottles 

of cleansing cream and lip moisturizer and sun block, there was 
almost nothing that could be called cosmetics. When I finished 
trimming my nails, I made myself some coffee and drank it at the 
kitchen table, German book open. Stripping down to a T-shirt in the 
sun-filled kitchen, I had set about memorizing all the forms in a 
grammar chart when I was struck by an odd feeling. It seemed to me 
that the longest imaginable distance separated irregular German verb 
forms from this kitchen table. 

The two women came back from the farm at 11.30, took turns in the 
shower, and changed into fresh clothes. The three of us went to the 
dining hall for lunch, then walked to the front gate. This time the 
guardhouse had a man on duty. He was sitting at his desk, enjoying a 
lunch that must have been brought to him from the dining hall. The 
transistor radio on the shelf was playing a sentimental old pop tune. 
He waved to us with a friendly "Hi" as we approached, and we 
hello'ed him back. 

Reiko explained to him that we were going to walk outside the 
grounds and return in three hours. 

"Great," he said. "You're lucky with the weather. Just stay away from 
the valley road, though. It got washed out in that big rain. No problem 
anywhere else." 

Reiko wrote her name and Naoko's in a register along with the date 
and time. 

"Enjoy yourselves," said the guard. "And take care." 

"Nice guy," I said. 

 



"He's a little strange up here," said Reiko, touching her head. 

He had been right about the weather, though. The sky was a fresh- 
swept blue, with only a trace of white cloud clinging to the dome of 
heaven like a thin streak of test paint. We walked beside the low stone 
wall of Ami Hostel for a time, then moved away to climb a steep, 
narrow trail in single file. Reiko led the way, with Naoko in the 
middle and me bringing up the rear. Reiko climbed with the confident 
stride of one who knew every stretch of every mountain in the area. 
We concentrated on walking, with hardly a word among us. Naoko 
wore blue jeans and a white blouse and carried her jacket in one hand. 
I watched her long, straight hair swaying right and left where it met 
her shoulders. She would glance back at me now and then, smiling 
when our eyes met. The trail continued upwards so far that it was 
almost dizzying, but Reiko's pace never slackened. Naoko hurried to 
keep up with her, wiping the sweat from her face. Not having indulged 
in such outdoor activities for some time, I found myself running short 
of breath. 

"Do you do this a lot?" I asked Naoko. 

"Maybe once a week," she answered. "Having a tough time?" 

"Kind of," I said. 

"We're almost there," said Reiko. "This is about two-thirds of the way. 
Come on, you're a boy, aren't you?" "Yeah, but I'm out of shape." 
"Playing with girls all the time," muttered Naoko, as if to herself. 

I wanted to answer her, but I was too winded to speak. Every now and 
then, red birds with tufts on their heads would flit across our path, 
brilliant against the blue sky. The fields around us were filled with 
white and blue and yellow flowers, and bees buzzed everywhere. 
Moving ahead one step at a time, I thought of nothing but the scene 
passing before my eyes. 

The slope gave out after another ten minutes, and we gained a level 

plateau. We rested there, wiping the sweat off, catching 

our breath and drinking from our water bottles. Reiko found a leaf and 

 



used it to make a whistle. 

The trail entered a gentle downward slope amid tall, waving thickets 
of plume grass. We walked on for some 15 minutes before passing 
through a village. There were no signs of humanity here, and the 
dozen or so houses were all in varying states of decay. Waist-high 
grass grew among the houses, and dry, white gobs of pigeon 
droppings clung to holes in the walls. Only the pillars survived in the 
case of one collapsed building, while others looked ready to be lived 
in as soon as you opened the storm shutters. These dead, silent houses 
pressed against either side of the road as we slipped through. 

"People lived in this village until seven or eight years ago," Reiko 
informed me. "This was farmland around here. But they all cleared 
out. Life was just too hard. They'd be trapped when the snow piled up 
in the winter. And the soil isn't particularly fertile. They could make a 
better living in the city." 

"What a waste," I said. "Some of the houses look perfectly usable." 
"Some hippies tried living here at one point, but they gave up. 
Couldn't take the winters." 

A little beyond the village we came to a big fenced area that seemed to 
be a pasture. Far away on the other side, I caught sight of a few horses 
grazing. We followed the fence line, and a big dog came running over 
to us, tail wagging. It stood up leaning on Reiko, sniffing her face, 
then jumped playfully on Naoko. I whistled and it came over to me, 
licking my hand with its long tongue. 

Naoko patted the dog's head and explained that the animal belonged to 
the pasture. "I'll bet he's close to 20," she said. "His teeth are so bad, 
he can't eat anything hard. He sleeps in front of the shop all day, and 
he comes running when he hears footsteps." 

Reiko took a scrap of cheese from her rucksack. Catching its scent, the 
dog bounded over to her and chomped down on it. 

"We won't be able to see this fellow much longer," said Reiko, patting 
the dog's head. "In the middle of October they put the horses and cows 

 



in tracks and take 'em down to the bam. The only time they let 'em 
graze is the summer, when they open a little cafe kind of thing for the 
tourists. The "tourists'! Maybe 20 hikers in a day. Hey, how about 
something to drink?" 

"Good idea," I said. 

The dog led the way to the cafe, a small, white house with a front 
porch and a faded sign in the shape of a coffee cup hanging from the 
eaves. He led us up the steps and stretched out on the porch, 
narrowing his eyes. When we took our places around a table on the 
porch, a girl with a ponytail and wearing a sweatshirt and white jeans 
came out and greeted Reiko and Naoko like old friends. 

"This is a friend of Naoko's," said Reiko, introducing me. "Hi," she 
said. 

"Hi," I answered. 

While the three women traded small talk, I stroked the neck of the dog 
under the table. It had the hard, stringy neck of an old dog. When I 
scratched the lumpy spots, the dog closed his eyes and sighed with 
pleasure. 

"What's his name?" I asked the girl. 

"Pepe," she said. 

"Hey, Pepe," I said to the dog, but he didn’t budge. 

"He's hard of hearing," said the girl. "You have to speak up or he can't 
hear." 

"Pepe!" I shouted. The dog opened his eyes and snapped t> attention 
with a bark. 

"Never mind, Pepe," said the girl. "Sleep more and live longer." Pepe 
flopped down again at my feet. 

Naoko and Reiko ordered cold glasses of milk and I asked for a beer. 
"Let's hear the radio," said Reiko. The girl switched on an anplifier 
and tuned into an FM station. Blood, Sweat and Tears came on with 
"Spinning Wheel". 

Reiko looked pleased. "Now this is what we're here for! We don’t have 

 



radios in our rooms, so if I don't come here once in a while, I don't 
have any idea what's playing out there." 

"Do you sleep in this place?" I asked the girl. 

"No way!" she laughed. "I'd die of loneliness if I spent the night here. 
The pasture guy drives me into town and I come out again in the 
morning." She pointed at a four-wheel drive track parked in front of 
the nearby pasture office. 

"You've got a holiday coming up soon, too, right?" asked Reiko. 

"Yeah, we'll be shutting up this place soon," said the girl. Reiko 
offered her a cigarette, and they smoked. 

"I'll miss you," said Reiko. 

"I'll be back in May, though," said the girl with a laugh. 

Cream came on the radio with "White Room". After a commercial, it 
was Simon and Garfunkel's "Scarborough Fair". 

"I like that," said Reiko when it was over. 

"I saw the film," I said. 

"Who’s in it?" 

"Dustin Hoffman." 

"I don’t know him," she said with a sad little shake of the head. "The 
world changes like mad, and I don't know what's happening." She 
asked the girl for a guitar. "Sure," said the girl, switching off the radio 
and bringing out an old guitar. The dog raised its head and sniffed the 
instrument. 

"You can't eat this," Reiko said with mock sternness. A grass-scented 
breeze swept over the porch. The mountains lay spread out before us, 
the ridge line sharp against the sky. 

"It's like a scene from The Sound of Music," I said to Reiko as she 
tuned up. 

"What's that?" she asked. 

She strummed the guitar in search of the opening chord of 
"Scarborough Fair". This was apparently her first attempt at the song, 
but after a few false starts she could play it through without hesitating. 

 



She had it down pat the third time and even started adding a few 
flourishes. "Good ear," she said to me with a wink. "I can usually play 
just about anything if I hear it three times." 

Softly humming the melody, she did a full rendition of "Scarborough 
Fair". The three of us applauded, and Reiko responded with a 
decorous bow of the head. 

"I used to get more applause for a Mozart concerto," she said. 

Her milk was on the house if she would play the Beatles' "Here Comes 
the Sun", said the girl. Reiko gave her a thumbs up and launched into 
the song. Hers was not a full voice, and too much smoking had given 
it a husky edge, but it was lovely, with real presence. I almost felt as if 
the sun really was coming up again as I sat there listening and 
drinking beer and looking at the mountains. It was a soft, warm 
feeling. 

Reiko gave back the guitar and asked to hear the radio again. Then she 
suggested to Naoko and me that we take an hour and walk around the 
area. 

"I want to listen to the radio some more and hang out 
with her. If you come back by three, that should be OK." 

"Is it all right for us to be alone together so long?" 

"Well, actually, it's against the rules, but what the hell. I'm not a 
chaperone, after all. I could use a break. And you came all the way 
from Tokyo, I'm sure there's tons of stuff you want to talk about." 
Reiko lit another cigarette as she spoke. 

"Let's go," said Naoko, standing up. 

I started after her. The dog woke up and followed us for a while, but it 
soon lost interest and went back to its place on the porch. We strolled 
down a level road that followed the pasture fence. Naoko would take 
my hand every now and then or slip her arm under mine. 

"This is kind of like the old days, isn't it?" she said. 

"That wasn't 'the old days'," I laughed. "It was spring of this year! If 
that was 'the old days', ten years ago was ancient history." 

 



"It feels like ancient history," said Naoko. "But anyway, sorry about 
last night. I don't know, I was a bundle of nerves. I really shouldn't 
have done that after you came here all the way from Tokyo." 

"Never mind," I said. "Both of us have a lot of feelings we need to get 
out in the open. So if you want to take those feelings and smash 
somebody with them, smash me. Then we can understand each other 
better." 

"So if you understand me better, what then?" 

"You don’t get it, do you?" I said. "It’s not a question of what then’. 
Some people get a kick out of reading railway timetables and that’s all 
they do all day. Some people make huge model boats out of 
matchsticks. So what’s wrong if there happens to be one guy in the 
world who enjoys trying to understand you?" 

"Kind of like a hobby?" she said, amused. 

"Yeah, I guess you could call it a hobby. Most normal people would 
call it friendship or love or something, but if you want to call it a 
hobby, that's OK, too." 

"Tell me," said Naoko, "you liked Kizuki, too, didn't you?" "Of 
course," I said. 

"How about Reiko?" 

"I like her a lot," I said. "She’s really nice." 

"How come you always like people like that - people like us, I mean? 
We’re all kind of weird and twisted and drowning - me and Kizuki and 
Reiko. Why can’t you like more normal people?" 

"Because I don’t see you like that," I said after giving it some thought. 
"I don't see you or Kizuki or Reiko as "twisted' in any way. The guys I 
think of as twisted are out there running around." 

"But we are twisted," said Naoko. "I can see that." 

We walked on in silence. The road left the fence and came out to a 
circular grassy field ringed with trees like a pond. 

"Sometimes I wake up in the middle of the night so scared," said 
Naoko, pressing up against my arm. "I’m scared I'll never get better 

 



again. I'll always stay twisted like this and grow old and waste away 
here. I get so chilled it's like I'm all frozen inside. It's horrible ... so 
cold. .. " 

I put my arm around her and drew her close. 

"I feel like Kizuki is reaching out for me from the darkness, 

calling to me, "Hey, Naoko, we can't stay apart.' When I hear him 

saying that, I don't know what to do." "What do you do?" 

"Well... don't take this the wrong way, now." "OK, I won't." 

"I ask Reiko to hold me. I wake her up and crawl into her bed and let 
her hold me tight. And I cry. And she strokes me until the ice melts 
and I'm warm again. Do you think it's sick?" 

"No. I wish I could be the one to hold you, though," I said. 

"So hold me. Now. Right here." 

We sat down on the diy grass of the meadow and put our arms around 
each other. The tall grass surrounded us, and we could see nothing but 
the sky and clouds above. I gently lay Naoko down and took her in my 
arms. She was soft and warm and her hands reached out for me. We 
kissed with real feeling. 

"Tell me something, Tom," Naoko whispered in my ear. 

"What's that?" I asked. 

"Do you want to sleep with me?" 

"Of course I do," I said. "Can you wait?" "Of course I can." 

"Before we do it again, I want to get myself a little better. I want to 
make myself into a person more worthy of that hobby of yours. Will 
you wait for me to do that?" 

"Of course I'll wait." "Are you hard now?" 

"You mean the soles of my feet?" "Silly," Naoko tittered. 

"If you're asking whether I have an erection, of course I do." "Will 
you do me a favour and stop saying "Of course'?" "OK, I'll stop." 

"Is it difficult?" "What?" 

"To be all hard like that." "Difficult?" 

"I mean, are you suffering?" 

 



"Well, it depends how you look at it." 

"Want me to help you get rid of it?" 

"With your hand?" 

"Uh-huh. To tell you the truth," said Naoko, "it's been sticking into me 
ever since we lay down. It hurts." I pulled my hips away. "Better?" 
"Thanks." 

"You know?" I said. 

"What?" 

"I wish you would do it." 

"OK," she said with a kind smile. Then she unzipped my trousers and 
took my stiff penis in her hand. "It's warm," she said. 

She started to move her hand, but I stopped her and unbuttoned her 
blouse, reaching around to undo her bra strap. I kissed her soft, pink 
nipples. She closed her eyes and slowly started moving her fingers. 
"Hey, you're pretty good at that," I said. "Be a good boy and shut up," 
said Naoko. 

After I came, I held her in my arms and kissed her again. Naoko did 
up her bra and blouse, and I zipped up my flies. 

"Will that make it easier for you to walk?" she asked. 

"I owe it all to you." 

"Well, then. Sir, if it suits you, shall we walk a little farther?" 

"By all means." 

We cut across the meadow, through a stand of trees, and across 
another meadow. Naoko talked about her dead sister, explaining that 
although she had hardly said anything about this to anyone, she felt 
she ought to tell me. 

"She was six years older than me, and our personalities were totally 
different, but still we were very close. We never fought, not once. It's 
true. Of course, with such a big difference in our ages, there was 
nothing much for us to fight about." 

Her sister was one of those girls who are successful at every 

 



thing - a super-student, a super-athlete, popular, a leader, kind, 
straightforward, the boys liked her, her teachers loved her, her walls 
were covered with certificates of merit. There's always one girl like 
that in any school. "I'm not saying this because she's my sister, but she 
never let any of this spoil her or make her the least bit stuck-up or a 
show-off. It's just that, no matter what you gave her to do, she would 
naturally do it better than anyone else. 

"So when I was little, I decided that I was going to be the sweet little 
girl." Naoko twirled a frond of plume grass as she spoke. "I mean, you 
know, I grew up hearing everybody talking about how smart she was 
and how good she was at games and how popular she was. Of course 
I'm going to assume there's no way I could ever compete with her. My 
face, at least, was a little prettier than hers, so I guess my parents 
decided they'd bring me up cute. Right from the start they put me in 
that kind of school. They dressed me in velvet dresses and frilly 
blouses and patent leather shoes and gave me piano lessons and ballet 
lessons. This just made my sister even crazier about me - you know: I 
was her cute little sister. She'd give me these cute little presents and 
take me everywhere with her and help me with my homework. She 
even took me along on dates. She was the best big sister anyone could 
ask for. 

"Nobody knew why she killed herself. The same as Kizuki. Exactly 
the same. She was 17, too, and she never gave the slightest hint she 
was going to commit suicide. She didn’t leave a note, either. Really, it 
was exactly the same, don't you think?" 

"Sounds like it." 

"Everybody said she was too smart or she read too many books. And 
she did read a lot. She had tons of books. I read a bunch of them after 
she died, and it was so sad. They had her comments in the margins 
and flowers pressed between the pages and letters from boyfriends, 
and every time I came across something like that I'd cry. I cried a lot." 
Naoko fell silent for a few seconds, twirling the plume grass again. 

 



"She was the kind of person who took care of things by herself. She'd 
never ask anybody for advice or help. It wasn't a matter of pride, I 
think. She just did what seemed natural to her. My parents were used 
to this and thought she'd be OK if they left her alone. I would go to 
my sister for advice and she was always ready to give it, but she never 
went to anyone else. She did what needed to be done, on her own. She 
never got angry or moody. This is all true, I mean it. I'm not 
exaggerating. Most girls, when they have their period or something, 
will get grumpy and take it out on others, but she never even did that. 
Instead of getting into a bad mood, she would become very subdued. 
Maybe once in two or three months this would happen to her: she'd 
shut herself up in her room and stay in bed, avoid school, hardly eat a 
thing, turn the lights off, and space out. She wouldn't be in a bad 
mood, though. When I came home from school, she’d call me into her 
room and sit me down next to her and ask me about my day. I'd tell 
her all the little things - like what kinds of games I played with my 
friends or what the teacher said or my exam results, stuff like that. 
She'd take in every detail and make comments and suggestions, but as 
soon as I left - to play with a friend, say, or go to a ballet lesson - she'd 
space out again. After two days, she'd snap out of it just like that and 
go to 

school. This kind of thing went on for, I don't know, maybe 
four years. My parents were worried at first and I think they went to a 
doctor for advice, but, I mean, she'd be perfectly fine after two days, 
so they thought it would work itself out if they left her alone, she was 
such a bright, steady girl. 

"After she died, though, I heard my parents talking about a younger 
brother of my father's who had died long before. He had also been 
very bright, but he had stayed shut up in the house for four years - 
from the time he was 17 until he was 21. And then suddenly one day 
he left the house and jumped in front of a train. My father said, 
"Maybe it's in the blood - from my side'." 

 



While Naoko was speaking, her fingers unconsciously teased the 
tassel of the plume grass, scattering its fibres to the wind. When the 
shaft was bare, she wound it around her fingers. 

"I was the one who found my sister dead," she went on. "In autumn 
when I was in the first year. November. On a dark, rainy day. My 
sister was in the sixth-form at the time. I came home from my piano 
lesson at 6.30 and my mother was making dinner. She told me to tell 
my sister it was ready. I went upstairs and knocked on her door and 
yelled "Dinner's ready', but there was no answer. Her room was 
completely silent. I thought this was strange, so I knocked again, 
opened the door and peeped inside. I thought she was probably 
sleeping. She wasn't in bed, though. She was standing by the window, 
staring outside, with her neck bent at a kind of angle like this, like she 
was thinking. The room was dark, the lights were out, and it was hard 
to see anything. "What are you doing?' I said to her. "Dinner is ready.' 
That's when I noticed that she looked taller than usual. What was 
going on? I wondered: it was so strange! Did she have high heels on? 
Was she standing on something? I moved closer and was just about to 
speak to her again when I saw it: there was a rope above her head. It 
came straight down from a beam in the ceiling - I mean it was 
amazingly straight, like somebody had drawn a line in space with a 
ruler. My sister had a white blouse on - yeah, a simple white blouse 
like this one - and a grey skirt, and her toes were pointing down like a 
ballerina's, except there was a space between the tip of her toes and 
the floor of maybe seven or eight inches. I took in every detail. Her 
face, too. I looked at her face. I couldn’t help it. I thought: I've got to 
go right downstairs and tell my mother. I've got to scream. But my 
body ignored me. It moved on its own, separately from my conscious 
mind. It was trying to lower her from the rope while my mind was 
telling me to hurry downstairs. Of course, there was no way a little 
girl could have the strength to do such a thing, and so I just stood 
there, spacing out, for maybe five or six minutes, a total blank, like 

 



something inside me had died. I just stayed that way, with my sister, 
in that cold, dark place until my mother came up to see what was 
going on." 

Naoko shook her head. 

"For three days after that I couldn't talk. I just lay in bed like a dead 
person, eyes wide open and staring into space. I didn't know what was 
happening." Naoko pressed against my arm. "I told you in my letter, 
didn't I? I'm a far more flawed human being than you realize. My 
sickness is a lot worse than you think: it has far deeper roots. And 
that's why I want you to go on ahead of me if you can. Don't wait for 
me. Sleep with other girls if you want to. Don't let thoughts of me hold 
you back. Just do what you want to do. Otherwise, I might end up 
taking you with me, and that is the one thing I don't want to do. I don't 
want to interfere with your life. I don't want to interfere with 
anybody's life. Like I said before, I want you to come to see me every 
once in a while, and always remember me. That's all I want." 

"It's not all / want, though," I said. 

"You're wasting your life being involved with me." "I'm not wasting 
anything." 

"But I might never recover. Will you wait for me forever? 

Can you wait 10 years, 20 years?" 

"You're letting yourself be scared by too many things," I said. "The 
dark, bad dreams, the power of the dead. You have to forget them. I'm 
sure you'll get well if you do." 

"If I can," said Naoko, shaking her head. 

"If you can get out of this place, will you live with me?" I asked. 
"Then I can protect you from the dark and from bad dreams. Then 
you'd have me instead of Reiko to hold you when things got difficult." 
Naoko pressed still more firmly against me. "That would be 
wonderful," she said. 

We got back to the cafe a little before three. Reiko was reading a book 

 



and listening to Brahms' Second Piano Concerto on the radio. There 
was something wonderful about Brahms playing at the edge of a 
grassy meadow without a sign of anyone as far as the eye could see. 
Reiko was whistling along with the cello passage that begins the third 
movement. 

"Backhaus and Bohm," she said. "I wore this record out once, a long 
time ago. Literally. I wore the grooves out listening to every note. I 
sucked the music right out of it." 

Naoko and I ordered coffee. 

"Do a lot of talking?" asked Reiko. 

"Tons," said Naoko. 

"Tell me all about his, uh, you know, later." 

"We didn't do any of that," said Naoko, reddening. "Really?" Reiko 
asked me. "Nothing?" "Nothing," I said. 

"Bo-o-o-ring!" she said with a bored look on her face. "True," I said, 
sipping my coffee. 

The scene in the dining hall was the same as the day before - the 
mood, the voices, the faces. Only the menu had changed. The balding 
man in white, who yesterday had been talking about the secretion of 
gastric juices under weightless conditions, joined the three of us at our 
table and talked for a long time about the correlation of brain size to 
intelligence. As we ate our soybean burgers, we heard all about the 
volume of Bismarck's brain and Napoleon's. He pushed his plate aside 
and used a ballpoint pen and notepaper to draw sketches of brains. He 
would start to draw, declare "No, that's not quite it", and begin a new 
one. This happened several times. When he had finished, he carefully 
put the remaining notepaper away in a pocket of his white jacket and 
slipped the pen into his breast pocket, in which he kept a total of three 
pens, along with pencils and a ruler. Having finished his meal, he 
repeated what he had told me the day before, "The winters here are 
really nice. Make sure you come back when it's winter," and left the 

 



dining hall. 

"Is he a doctor or a patient?" I asked Reiko. "Which do you think?" 

"I really can't tell. In either case, he doesn't seem all that normal." 

"He’s a doctor," said Naoko. "Doctor Miyata." 

"Yeah," said Reiko, "but I bet he’s the craziest one here." "Mr Omura, 

the gatekeeper, is pretty crazy, too," answered 

Naoko. 

"True," said Reiko, nodding as she stabbed her broccoli. "He does 
these wild callisthenics every morning, screaming nonsense at the top 
of his lungs. And before you came, Naoko, there was a girl in the 
business office. Miss Kinoshita, who tried to kill herself. And last year 
they sacked a male nurse, Tokushima, who had a terrible drinking 
problem." 

"Sounds like patients and staff should swap places," I said. 

"Right on," said Reiko, waving her fork in the air. "You’re finally 
starting to see how things work here." 

"I suppose so." 

"What makes us most normal," said Reiko, "is knowing that we’re not 
normal." 

Back in the room, Naoko and I played cards while Reiko practised 
Bach on her guitar. 

"What time are you leaving tomorrow?" Reiko asked me, taking a 
break and lighting a cigarette. 

"Straight after breakfast," I said. "The bus comes at nine. That way I 
can get back in time for tomorrow night's work." 

"Too bad. It'd be nice if you could stay longer." 

"If I stayed around too long, I might end up living here," I said, 
laughing. 

"Maybe so," Reiko said. Then, to Naoko, she said, "Oh, yeah. I've got 
to go get some grapes at Oka's. I totally forgot." 

"Want me to go with you?" asked Naoko. 

 



"How about letting me borrow your young Mr Watanabe here?" 

"Fine," said Naoko. 

"Good. Let's just the two of us go for another nighttime stroll," said 
Reiko, taking my hand. "We Yesterday. Let's go all the way tonight." 
"Fine," said Naoko, tittering. "Do what you like." 
were almost there. 

The night air was cool. Reiko wore a pale blue cardigan over her shirt 
and walked with her hands shoved in her jeans pockets. Looking up at 
the sky, she sniffed the breeze like a dog. "Smells like rain," she said. 
I tried sniffing too, but couldn’t smell anything. True, there were lots 
of clouds in the sky obscuring the moon. 

"If you stay here long enough, you can pretty much tell the weather by 
the smell of the air," said Reiko. 

We entered the wooded area where the staff houses stood. Reiko told 
me to wait a minute, walked over to the front door of one house and 
rang the bell. A woman came to the door - no doubt the lady of the 
house - and stood there chatting and chuckling with Reiko. Then she 
ducked inside and came back with a large plastic bag. Reiko thanked 
her and said goodnight before returning to the spot where I was 
waiting. 

"Look,” she said, opening the bag. 

It held a huge cluster of grapes. 

"Do you like grapes?" 

"Love them." 

She handed me the top bunch. "It's OK to eat them. They're washed." 

We walked along eating grapes and spitting the skins and seeds on the 
ground. They were fresh and delicious. 

"I give their son piano lessons once in a while, and they offer me 
different stuff. The wine we had was from them. I sometimes ask them 
to do a little shopping for me in town." 

"I'd like to hear the rest of the story you were telling me yesterday," I 
said. 

 



"Fine," said Reiko. "But if we keep coming home late, Naoko might 
start getting suspicious." 

"I'm willing to risk it." 

"OK. then. I want a roof, though. It's a little chilly tonight." 

She turned left as we approached the tennis courts. We went down a 
narrow stairway and came out at a spot where several storehouses 
stood like a block of houses. Reiko opened the door of the nearest one, 
stepped in and turned on the lights. "Come in," she said. "There's not 
much to see, though." 

The storehouse contained neat rows of cross-country skis, boots and 
poles, and on the floor were piled snow removal equipment and bags 
of rock salt. 

"I used to come here all the time for guitar practice - when I wanted to 
be alone. Nice and cosy, isn’t it?" 

Reiko sat on the bags of rock salt and invited me to sit next to her. I 
did as I was told. 

"Not much ventilation here, but mind if I smoke?" 

"Go ahead," I said. 

"This is one habit I can't seem to break," she said with a frown, but 
she lit up with obvious enjoyment. Not many people enjoy tobacco as 
much as Reiko did. I ate my grapes, carefully peeling them one at a 
time and tossing the skins and seeds into a tin that served as a rubbish 
bin. 

"Now, let's see, how far did we get last night?" Reiko asked. 

"It was a dark and stormy night, and you were climbing the steep cliff 
to grab the bird's nest." 

"You're amazing, the way you can joke around with such a straight 
face," said Reiko. "Let's see, I think I had got to the point where I was 
giving piano lessons to the girl every Saturday morning." 

"That’s it." 

"Assuming you can divide everybody in the world into two groups - 

 



those who are good at teaching things to people, and those who are not 
-1 pretty much belong to the first group," said Reiko. "I never thought 
so when I was young, and I suppose I didn’t want to think of myself 
that way, but once 

I reached a certain age and had attained a degree of selfknowledge I 
realized it was true after all: I'm good at teaching people things. Really 
good." 

"I bet you are." 

"I have a lot more patience for others than I have for myself, and I'm 
much better at bringing out the best in others than in myself. That's 
just the kind of person I am. I'm the scratchy stuff on the side of the 
matchbox. But that's fine with me. I don’t mind at all. Better to be a 
first-class matchbox than a second-class match. I got this clear in my 
own mind. I’d say, after I started teaching this girl. I had taught a few 
others when I was younger, strictly as a sideline, without realizing this 
about myself. It was only after I started teaching her that I began to 
think of myself that way. Hey - I'm good at teaching people. That's 
how well the lessons went. 

As I said yesterday, the girl was nothing special when it came to 
technique, and there was no question of her becoming a professional 
musician, so I could take it easy. Plus she was going to the kind of 
girls' school where anybody with halfdecent marks automatically got 
into university, which meant she didn't have to kill herself studying, 
and her mother was all for going easy with the lessons, too. So I didn’t 
push her to do anything. I knew the first time I met her that she was 
the kind of girl you couldn't push to do anything, that she was the kind 
of child who would be all sweetness and say "Yes, yes,’ and absolutely 
refuse to do anything she didn’t want to do. So the first thing I did was 
let her play a piece the way she wanted to - 100 per cent her own way. 
Then I would play the same piece several different ways for her, and 
the two of us would discuss which was best or which way she liked 

 



most. Then I'd have her play the piece again, and her performance 
would be ten times better than the first. She would see for 
herself what worked best and bring those features into her own 
playing." 

Reiko paused for a moment, observing the glowing end of her 
cigarette. I went on eating my grapes without a word. 

"I know I have a pretty good sense for music, but she was better than 
me. I used to think it was such a waste! I thought, 

,if only she had started out with a good teacher and received the 
proper training, she’d be so much farther along!' But I was wrong. She 
wasn't the kind of child who could stand proper training. There just 
happen to be people like that. They're blessed with this marvellous 
talent, but they can't make the effort to systematize it. They end up 
squandering it in little bits and pieces. I've seen my share of people 
like that. At first you think they're amazing. They can sight-read some 
terrifically difficult piece and do a damn good job playing it all the 
way through. You see them do it, and you're overwhelmed. You think, 
"I could never do that in a million years.' But that's as far as it goes. 
They can't take it any further. And why not? Because they won't put in 
the effort. They haven't had the discipline pounded into them. They've 
been spoiled. They have just enough talent so they've been able to 
play things well without any effort and they've had people telling them 
how great they are from an early age, so hard work looks stupid to 
them. They'll take some piece another kid has to work on for three 
weeks and polish it off in half the time, so the teacher assumes they've 
put enough into it and lets them go on to the next thing. And they do 
that in half the time and go on to the next piece. They never find out 
what it means to be hammered by the teacher; they lose out on a 
crucial element required for character building. It's a tragedy. I myself 
had tendencies like that, but fortunately I had a very tough teacher, so 
I kept them in check. 

"Anyway, it was a joy to teach her. Like driving down the highway in 

 



a high-powered sports car that responds to the slightest touch - 
responds too quickly, sometimes. The trick to teaching children like 
that is not to praise them too much. They're so used to praise it doesn't 
mean anything to them. You've got to dole it out wisely. And you can't 
force anything on them. You have to let them choose for themselves. 
And you don't let them rush ahead from one thing to the next: you 
make them stop and think. But that's about it. If you do those things, 
you'll get good results." 

Reiko dropped her cigarette butt on the floor and stamped it out. Then 
she took a deep breath as if to calm herself. 

"When her lessons ended, we'd have tea and chat. Sometimes I’d show 
her certain jazz piano styles - like, this is Bud Powell, or this is 
Thelonious Monk. But mostly she talked. And what a talker she was! 
She could draw you right in. As I told you yesterday, I think most of 
what she said was made up, but it was interesting. She was a keen 
observer, a precise user of language, sharp-tongued and funny. She 
could stir your emotions. Yes, really, that's what she was so good at - 
stirring people's emotions, moving you. And she knew she had this 
power. She tried to use it as skilfully and effectively as possible. She 
could make you feel whatever she wanted - angry or sad or 
sympathetic or disappointed or happy. She would manipulate people's 
emotions for no other reason than to test her own powers. Of course, I 
only realized this later. At the time, I had no idea what she was doing 
to me." 

Reiko shook her head and ate a few grapes. 

"It was a sickness," she said. "The girl was sick. She was like the 
rotten apple that ruins all the other apples. And no one could cure her. 
She'll have that sickness until the day she dies. In that sense, she was a 
sad little creature. I would have 

pitied her, too, if I hadn't been one of her victims. I would have seen 
her as a victim." 

Reiko ate a few more grapes. She seemed to be thinking of how best 

 



to go on with her story. 

"Well, anyway, I enjoyed teaching her for a good six months. 
Sometimes I'd find something she said a little surprising or odd. Or 
she'd be talking and I'd have this rash of horror when I realised the 
intensity of her hatred for some person was completely irrational, or it 
would occur to me that she was just far too clever, and I'd wonder 
what she was really thinking. But, after all, everyone has their flaws, 
right? And finally, what business was it of mine to question her 
personality or character? I was just her piano teacher. All I had to care 
about was whether she practised or not. And besides, the truth of the 
matter is that I liked her. I liked her a lot. 

"Still, I was careful not to tell her anything too personal about myself. 
I just had this sixth sense that I’d better not talk about such things. She 
asked me hundreds of questions - she was dying to know more about 
me - but I only told her the most harmless stuff, like things about my 
childhood or where I’d gone to school, stuff like that. She said she 
wanted to know more about me, but I told her there was nothing to 
tell: I’d had a boring life, I had an ordinary husband, an ordinary child, 
and a ton of housework. "But I like you so much,' she’d say and look 
me right in the eye in this clingy sort of way. It sent a thrill through 
me when she did that - a nice thrill. But even so, I never told her more 
than I had to. 

"And then one day - a day in May, I think it was - in the middle of her 
lesson, she said she felt sick. I saw she was pale and sweating and 
asked if she wanted to go home, but she said she thought she'd feel 
better if she could just lie down for a while. So I took her - almost 
carried her - to the bedroom. 

We had such a small sofa, the bed was the only place she could lie 
down. She apologized for being a nuisance, but I assured her it was no 
bother and asked if she wanted anything to drink. She said no, she just 
wanted me to stay near her, which I said I’d be glad to do. 

"A few minutes later she asked me to rub her back. She sounded as 

 



though she was really suffering, and she was sweating like mad, so I 
started to give her a good massage. Then she apologized and asked me 
if I'd mind taking off her bra, as it was hurting her. So, I don't know, I 
did it. She was wearing a skin-tight blouse, and I had to unbutton that 
and reach behind and undo the bra hooks. She had big breasts for a -year-old. Twice as big as mine. And she wasn't wearing any starter 
bra but a real adult model, an expensive one. Of course I'm not paying 
all that much attention at the time, and like an idiot I just carry on 
rubbing her back. She keeps apologizing in this pitiful voice as if she's 
really sorry, and I keep telling her it's OK it's OK." 

Reiko tapped the ash from her cigarette to the floor. By then I had 
stopped eating grapes and was giving all my attention to her story. 

"After a while she starts sobbing. "What's wrong?' I ask her. 
"Nothing, 1 she says. "It's obviously not nothing,’ I say. "Tell me the 
truth. What's bothering you?' So she says, "I just get like this 
sometimes. I don't know what to do. I'm so lonely and sad, and I can't 
talk to anybody, and nobody cares about me. And it hurts so much, I 
just get like this. I can't sleep at night, and I don't feel like eating, and 
coming here for my lesson is the only thing I have to look forward to.' 
So I say, "You can talk to me. Tell me why this happens to you.' 
Things are not going well at home, she says. She can't love her 
parents, and they don't love her. Her father is seeing another woman 
and is hardly ever around, and that makes her mother half crazy and 
she takes it out on the girl; she beats her almost every day and she 
hates to go home. So now the girl is really wailing, and her eyes are 
full of tears, those beautiful eyes of hers. The sight is enough to make 
a god weep. So I tell her, if it's so terrible to go home, she can come to 
my place any time she likes. When she hears that, the girl throws her 
arms around me and says, "Oh, I'm so sorry, but if I didn’t have you I 
wouldn't know what to do. Please don’t turn your back on me. If you 
did that. I’d have nowhere to go.’ 

"So, I don’t know, I hold her head against me and I’m caressing her 

 



and saying "There there,' and she's got her arms around me and she's 
stroking my back, and soon I'm starting to feel very strange, my whole 
body is kind of hot. I mean, here's this picture-perfect beautiful girl 
and I'm on the bed with her, and we're hugging, and her hands are 
caressing my back in this incredibly sensual way that my own 
husband couldn't even begin to match, and I feel all the screws coming 
loose in my body every time she touches me, and before I know it she 
has my blouse and bra off and she’s stroking my breasts. So that’s 
when it finally hits me that she’s an absolute dyed-in-the-wool lesbian. 
This had happened to me once before, at school, one of the sixth-form 
girls. So then I tell her to stop. 

""Oh, please,’ she says, "just a little more. I'm so lonely. I'm so lonely, 
please believe me, you're the only one I have, oh please, don't turn 
your back on me,' and she takes my hand and puts it on her breast - 
her very nicely shaped breast, and, sure. I'm a woman, but this electric 
something goes through me when my hand makes contact. I have no 
idea what to do. I just keep repeating no no no no no, like an idiot. It's 
as if I'm Paralyzed, I can't move. I had managed to push the girl 
away at school, but now I can't do a thing. My body won't take orders. 
She's holding my right hand against her with her left hand, and she's 
kissing and licking my nipples, and her right hand is caressing my 
back, my side, my bottom. So here I am in the bedroom with the 
curtains closed and a 13-year-old girl has me practically naked - she's 
been taking my clothes off somehow all along - and touching me all 
over and I'm writhing with the pleasure of it. Looking back on it now, 
it seems incredible. I mean, it's insane, don't you think? But at the time 
it was as if she had cast a spell on me." 

Reiko paused to puff at her cigarette. 

"You know, this is the first time I've ever told a man about it," she 
said, looking at me. "I'm telling it to you because I think I ought to, 
but I'm finding it really embarrassing." 

"I'm sorry," I said, because I didn't know what else to say. 

 



"This went on for a while, and then her right hand started to move 
down, and she touched me through my panties. By then, I was 
absolutely soaking wet. I'm ashamed to say it, but I've never been so 
wet before or since. I had always thought of myself as sort of 
indifferent to sex, so I was astounded to be getting so worked up. So 
then she puts these slim, soft fingers of hers inside my panties, and ... 
well, you know, I can't bring myself to put it into words. I mean, it 
was totally different from when a man puts his clumsy hands on you 
there. It was amazing. Really. Like feathers or down. I thought all the 
fuses in my head were going to pop. Still, somewhere in my fogged- 
over brain, the thought occurred to me that I had to put a stop to this. 
If I let it happen once. I'd never stop, and if I had to carry around a 
secret like that inside me, my head was going to get completely 
messed up again. I thought about my daughter, too. What if she saw 
me like this? She was supposed to be at my parents' house until three 
on 

Saturdays, but what if something happened and she came home 
unexpectedly ? This helped me to gather my strength and raise myself 
on the bed. "Stop it now, please stop!' I shouted. 

"But she wouldn't stop. Instead, she yanked my panties down and 
started using her tongue. I had rarely let even my husband do that, I 
found it so embarrassing, but now I had a 13-year-old girl licking me 
all over down there. I just gave up. All I could do was cry. And it was 
absolute paradise. 

""Stop it!’ I yelled one more time and slapped her on the side of the 
face as hard as I could. She finally stopped, raised herself up and 
looked into my eyes. The two of us were stark naked, on our knees, in 
bed, staring at each other. She was 13, I was 31, but, I don’t know, 
looking at that body of hers, I felt totally overwhelmed. The image is 
still so vivid in my mind. I could hardly believe I was looking at the 
body of a 13-year-old girl, and I still can’t believe it. By comparison, 
what I had for a body was enough to make you cry. Believe me." 

 



There was nothing I could say, and so I said nothing. 

""What's wrong?' she says to me. "You like it this way, don’t you? I 
knew you would the first time I met you. I know you like it. It's much 
better than doing it with a man - isn’t it? Look how wet you are. I can 
make you feel even better if you'll let me. It's true. I can make you feel 
like your body's melting away. You want me to, don't you?' And she 
was right. She was much better than my husband. And I did want her 
to do it even more! But I couldn’t let it happen. "Let's do this once a 
week,' she said. "Just once a week. Nobody will find out. It'll be our 
little secret'." 

"But I got out of bed and put on my dressing-gown and told her to 
leave and never come back. She just looked at me. Her eyes were 
absolutely flat. I had never seen them like that 

before. It was as if they were painted on cardboard. They had no 
depth. After she stared at me for a while, she gathered up her clothes 
without a word and. as slowly as she could, as though she were 
making a show of it, she put on each item, one at a time. Then she 
went back into the piano room and took a brush from her bag. She 
brushed her hair and wiped the blood from her lips with a 
handkerchief, put on her shoes, and left. As she went out, she said. 
"You’re a lesbian, you know. It’s true. You may try to hide it, but 
you'll be a lesbian until the day you die'." 

"Is it true?" I asked. 

Reiko curved her lips and thought for a while. "Well, it is and it isn't. I 
definitely felt better with her than with my husband. That's a fact. I 
had a time there when I really agonized over the question. Maybe I 
really was a lesbian and just hadn't noticed until then. But I don’t think 
so any more. Which is not to say I don’t have the tendencies. I 
probably do have them. But I’m not a lesbian in the proper sense of the 
term. I never feel desire when I look at a woman. Know what I 
mean?" 

I nodded. 

 



"Certain kinds of girls, though, do respond to me, and I can feel it 
when that happens. Those are the only times it comes out in me. I can 
hold Naoko in my arms, though, and feel nothing special. We go 
around in the flat practically naked when the weather's hot, and we 
take baths together, sometimes even sleep in the same bed, but 
nothing happens. I don't feel a thing. I can see that she has a beautiful 
body, but that's all. Actually, Naoko and I played a game once. We 
made believe we were lesbians. Want to hear about it?" 

"Sure. Tell me." 

"When I told her the story I just told you - we tell each 
other everything, you know - Naoko tried an experiment. The two of 
us got undressed and she tried caressing me, but it didn’t work at all. It 
just tickled. I thought I was going to die laughing. Just thinking about 
it makes me itchy. She was so clumsy! I'll bet you're glad to hear 
that." 

"Yes I am, to tell the truth." 

"Well, anyway, that's about it," said Reiko, scratching near an 
eyebrow with the tip of her little finger. "After the girl left my house, I 
found a chair and sat there spacing out for a while, wondering what to 
do. I could hear the dull beating of my heart from deep inside my 
body. My arms and legs seemed to weigh a ton, and my mouth felt as 
though I'd eaten a moth or something, it was so diy. But I dragged 
myself to the bathroom, knowing my daughter would be back soon. I 
wanted to clean those places where the girl had touched and licked 
me. I scrubbed myself with soap, over and over, but I couldn't seem to 
get rid of the slimy feeling she had left behind. I knew I was probably 
imagining it, but that didn’t help. That night, I asked my husband to 
make love to me, almost as a way to get rid of the defilement. Of 
course, I didn’t tell him anything -1 couldn't. All I said to him was that 
I wanted him to take it slow, to give it more time than usual. And he 
did. He concentrated on every little detail, he really took a long, long 
time, and the way I came that night, oh yes, it was like nothing I had 

 



ever experienced before, never once in all our married life. And why 
do you think that was? Because the touch of that girl's fingers was still 
there in my body. That's all it was. 

"Oh, man, is this embarrassing! Look, I'm sweating! I can't believe I'm 
saying these things - he "made love' to me, I "came'!" Reiko smiled, 
her lips curved again. "But even this didn't help. Two days went by, 
three, and her touch was still there. And her last words were echoing 
and echoing in my head. 

"She didn't come to my house the following Saturday. My heart was 
pounding all day long while I waited, wondering what I would do if 
she showed up. I couldn’t concentrate on anything. She never did 
come, though. Of course. She was a proud little thing, and she had 
failed with me in the end. She didn’t come the next week, either, nor 
the week after that, and soon a month went by. I decided that I would 
be able to forget about what had happened when enough time lad 
passed, but I couldn't forget. When I was alone in the house, I would 
feel her presence and my nerves would be on edge. I couldn't play the 
piano, I couldn't think, I couldn't do anything during that first month. 
And then one day I realized that something was wrong whenever I left 
the house. The neighbours were looking at me in a strange way. There 
was a new distance in their eyes. They were as polite as ever with 
their greetings, but there was something different in their tone of voice 
and in their behaviour towards me. The woman next door, who used to 
pay me an occasional visit, seemed to be avoiding me. I tried not to let 
these things bother me, though. Start noticing things like that, and 
you've got the first signs of illness. 

"Then one day I had a visit from another housewife I was on friendly 
terms with. We were the same age, and she was the daughter of a 
friend of my mother's, and her child went to the same kindergarten as 
mine, so we were fairly close. She just showed up one day and asked 
me if I knew about a terrible rumour that was going around about me. 
"What kind of rumour?' I asked. "I almost can't say it, it's so awful,' 

 



she said. "Well, you've got this far, you have to tell me the rest.' 

"Still she resisted telling me, but I finally got it all out of her. I mean, 
her whole purpose in coming to see me was to tell me what she had 
heard, so of course she was going to spit it out eventually. According 
to her, people were saying that I was a card-carrying lesbian and had 
been in and out of mental hospitals for it. They said that I had snipped 
the clothes off my piano pupil and tried to do things to her and when 
she had resisted I had slapped her so hard her face swelled up. They 
had turned the story on its head, of course, which was bad enough, but 
what really shocked me was that people knew I had been hospitalized. 
"My friend said she was telling everyone that she had known me for 
ever and that I was not like that, but the girl's parents believed her 
version and were spreading it around the neighbourhood. In addition, 
they had investigated my background and found that I had a history of 
mental problems. 

"The way my friend heard it, the girl had come home from her lesson 
one day - that day, of course - with her face all bloated, her lip split 
and bloody, buttons missing from her blouse, and even her underwear 
tom. Can you believe it? She had done all this to back up her story, of 
course, which her mother had to drag out of her. I can just see her 
doing it - putting blood on her blouse, tearing buttons off, ripping the 
lace on her bra, making herself cry until her eyes were red, messing up 
her hair, telling her mother a pack of lies. 

"Not that I'm blaming people for believing her. I would have believed 
her, too, this beautiful doll with a devil's tongue. She comes home 
crying, she refuses to talk because it's too embarrassing, but then she 
spills it out. Of course people are going to believe her. And to make 
matters worse, it's true, I do have a history of hospitalization for 
mental problems, I did hit her in the face as hard as I could. Who's 
going to believe me? Probably just my husband. 

A few more days went by while I wrestled with the 

question of whether to tell him or not, but when I did, he believed me. 

 



Of course. I told him everything that had happened that day - the kind 
of lesbian things she did to me, the way I slapped her in the face. Of 
course, I didn't tell him what I had felt. I couldn't have told him that. 
So anyway, he was furious and insisted that he was going to go 
straight to the girl's family. He said, "You're a married woman, after 
all. You're married to me. And you're a mother. There's no way you're 
a lesbian. What a joke!' 

"But I wouldn't let him go. All he could do was make things worse. I 
knew. I knew she was sick. I had seen hundreds of sick people, so I 
knew. The girl was rotten inside. Peel off a layer of that beautiful skin, 
and you'd find nothing but rotten flesh. I know it’s a terrible thing to 
say, but it’s true. And I knew that ordinary people could never know 
the truth about her, that there was no way we could win. She was an 
expert at manipulating the emotions of the adults around her, and we 
had nothing to prove our case. First of all, who’s going to believe that 
a 13-year-old girl set a homosexual trap for a woman in her thirties? 
No matter what we said, people would believe what they wanted to 
believe. The more we straggled, the more vulnerable we’d be. 

"There was only one thing for us to do, I said: we had to move. If I 
stayed in that neighbourhood any longer, the stress would get to me; 
my mind would snap again. It was happening already. We had to get 
out of there, go somewhere far away where nobody knew me. My 
husband wasn't ready to go, though. It hadn't dawned on him yet how 
critical I was. And the timing was terrible: he loved his work, and he 
had finally succeeded in getting us settled in our own house (we lived 
in a little prefab), and our daughter was comfortable in her 
kindergarten. "Wait a minute,' he said, "we can't just up sticks and go. 
I can't find a job just like that. We'd have to sell the house, and we'd 
have to find another kindergarten. It'll take two months at least." 

"I can't wait two months,” I told him. "This is going to finish me off 
once and for all. I'm not kidding. Believe me, I know what I'm talking 
about.' The symptoms were starting already: my ears were ringing. 

 



and I was hearing things, and I couldn’t sleep. So he suggested that I 
leave first, go somewhere by myself, and he would follow after he had 
taken care of what had to be done. 

""No,' I said, "I don’t want to go alone. I’ll fall apart if I don't have 
you. I need you. Please, don't leave me alone.’ He held me and pleaded 
with me to hang on a little longer. Just a month, he said. He would 
take care of everything - leave his job, sell the house, make 
arrangements for kindergarten, find a new job. There might be a 
position he could take in Australia, he said. He just wanted me to wait 
one month, and everything would be OK. What could I say to that? If 
I tried to object, it would only isolate me even more." 

Reiko sighed and looked at the ceiling light. 

"I couldn't hold on for a month, though. One day, it happened again: 
snap! And this time it was really bad. I took sleeping pills and turned 
on the gas. I woke up in a hospital bed, and it was all over. It took a 
few months before I had calmed down enough to think, and then I 
asked my husband for a divorce. I told him it would be the best thing 
for him and for our daughter. He said he had no intention of divorcing 
me. "We can make a new start,' he said. "We can go somewhere new, 
just the three of us, and begin all over again.' "It's too late,' I told him. 
"Everything ended when you asked me to wait a month. If you really 
wanted to start again, you shouldn’t have said that to me. Now, no 
matter where we go, no matter how far away we move, the same thing 
will happen all over again. And I'll ask you for the same thing, and 
make you suffer. I don't want to do that any more.' 

"And so we divorced. Or I should say I divorced him. He married 
again two years ago, though. I'm still glad I made him leave me. 
Really. I knew I'd be like this for the rest of my life, and I didn’t want 
to drag anyone down with me. I didn't want to force anyone to live in 
constant fear that I might lose my mind at any moment. 

"He had been wonderful to me: an ideal husband, faithful, strong and 
patient, someone I could put my complete trust in. He had done 

 



everything he could to heal me, and I had done everything I could to 
be healed, both for his sake and for our daughter's. And I had believed 
in my recovery. I was happy for six years from the time we were 
married. He got me 99 per cent of the way there, but the other one per 
cent went crazy. Snap! Everything we had built up came crashing 
down. In one split second, everything tinned into nothing. And that 
girl was the one who did it." 

Reiko collected the cigarette butts she had crushed underfoot and 
tossed them into the tin can. 

"It's a terrible story. We worked so hard, so hard, building our world 
one brick at a time. And when it fell apart, it happened just like that. 
Everything was gone before you knew it." 

She stood up and thrust her hands in her pockets. "Let's go back. It's 
late." 

The sky was darker, the cloud cover thicker than before, the moon 
invisible. Now, I realized, like Reiko I could smell the rain. And with 
it mixed the fresh smell of the grapes in the bag I was holding. 

"That's why I can't leave this place," she said. "I'm afraid to get 
involved with the outside world. I'm afraid to meet new people and 
feel new feelings." 

"I understand," I said. "But I think you can do it. I think you can go 
outside and make it." 

Reiko smiled, but said nothing. 

Naoko was on the sofa with a book. She had her legs crossed and 
pressed her hand against her temple as she read. Her fingers almost 
seemed to be touching and testing each word that entered her head. 
Scattered drops of rain were beginning to tap on the roof. The 
lamplight enveloped her, hovering around her like fine dust. After my 
long talk with Reiko, Naoko's youthfulness struck me in a new way. 
"Sorry we're so late," said Reiko, patting Naoko's head. 

"Enjoy yourselves?" asked Naoko, looking up. 

"Of course," said Reiko. 

 



"Doing what?" Naoko asked me, - just the two of you." 

"Not at liberty to say. Miss," I answered. 

Naoko chuckled and set down her book. Then the three of us ate 
grapes to the sound of the rain. 

"When it's raining like this," said Naoko, "it feels as if we're the only 
ones in the world. I wish it would just keep raining so the three of us 
could stay together." 

"Oh, sure," said Reiko, "and while the two of you are going at it. I'm 
supposed to be fanning you or playing background music on my guitar 
like some dumb geisha? No, thanks!" 

"Oh, I'd let you have him once in a while," said Naoko, laughing. 

"OK. then, count me in," said Reiko. "Come on. rain, pour down!" 

The rain did pour down, and kept pouring. Thunder shook the place 
from time to time. When we had finished the grapes, Reiko went back 
to her cigarettes and pulled out the guitar from under her bed and 
started to play - first, "Desafinado" and "The Girl from Ipanema", then 
some Bacharach and a few Lennon and McCartney songs. Reiko and I 
sipped wine again, and when that was gone we shared the brandy that 
was left in my flask. A warm, intimate mood took hold as the three of 
us talked into the night, and I began to wish, with Naoko, that the rain 
would keep on falling. 

"Will you come to see me again?" she asked, looking at me. 

"Of course I will," I said. 

"And will you write?" 

"Every week." 

"And will you add a few lines for me?" asked Reiko. "That I will," I 
said. "I'd be glad to." 

At eleven o'clock, Reiko unfolded the sofa and made a bed for me as 
she had the night before. We said goodnight and turned out the lights. 
Unable to sleep, I took The Magic Mountain and a torch from my 
rucksack and read for a while. Just before midnight, the bedroom door 
edged open and Naoko came and crawled in next to me. Unlike the 

 



night before, Naoko was the usual Naoko. Her eyes were in focus, her 
movements brisk. Bringing her mouth to my ear, she whispered, "I 
don't know, I can't sleep." 

"I can't either," I said. Setting my book down and turning out the 
torch, I took her in my arms and kissed her. The darkness and the 
sound of the rain enfolded us. 

"How about Reiko?" 

"Don't worry, she's sound asleep. And when she sleeps, she sleeps." 
Then Naoko asked, "Will you really come to see me again?" 

"Of course I will." 

"Even if I can't do anything for you?" 

I nodded in the darkness. I could feel the full shape of her breasts 
against me. I traced the outline of her body through her gown with the 
flat of my hand. From shoulder to back to hips, I ran my hand over her 
again and again, driving the line and the softness of her body into my 
brain. After we had been in this gentle embrace for a while, Naoko 
touched her lips to my forehead and slipped out of bed. I could see her 
pale blue gown flash in the darkness like a fish. 

"Goodbye," she called in a tiny voice. 

Listening to the rain, I dropped into a gentle sleep. 

It was still raining the following morning - a fine, almost invisible 
autumn rain unlike the previous night's downpour. You knew it was 
raining only because of the ripples on puddles and the sound of 
dripping from the eaves. I woke to see a milky white mist enclosing 
the window, but as the sun rose a breeze carried the mist away, and 
the surrounding woods and hills began to emerge. 

As we had done the day before, the three of us ate breakfast then went 
out to attend to the aviary. Naoko and Reiko wore yellow plastic 
raincapes with hoods. I put on a jumper and a waterproof windcheater. 
Outside the air was damp and chilly. The birds, too, were avoiding the 
rain, huddled together at the back of the cage. 

 



"Gets cold here when it rains, doesn't it?" I said to Reiko. 

"Every time it rains it'll be a little colder now, until it turns to snow," 
she said. "The clouds from the Sea of Japan dump tons of snow when 
they pass through here." 

"What do you do with the birds in the winter?" 

"Bring them inside, of course. What are we supposed to do - dig them 
out of the snow in spring all frozen? We defrost 'em and bring 'em 
back to life and yell, OK. everybody, come and get it!" 

I poked the wire mesh and the parrot flapped its wings and squawked 
"Shithead!" "Thank you!" "Crazy!" 

"Now, that one I’d like to freeze," Naoko said with a melancholy look. 
"I really think I will go crazy if I have to hear that every morning." 

After cleaning the aviary, we went back to the flat. While I packed my 
things, the women put on their farm clothes. We left the building 
together and parted just beyond the tennis court. They turned right and 
I continued straight ahead. We called goodbye to each other, and I 
promised I would come again. Naoko gave a little smile and 
disappeared around a corner. 

On my way to the gate I passed several people, all wearing the same 
yellow raincapes that Naoko and Reiko wore, all with their hoods up. 
Colours shone with an exceptional clarity in the rain: the ground was a 
deep black, the pine branches a brilliant green, and the people 
wrapped in yellow looking like otherworldly spirits that were only 
allowed to wander the earth on rainy mornings. They floated over the 
ground in silence, carrying farm tools, baskets and sacks. 

The gatekeeper remembered my name and marked it on the list of 
visitors as I left. "I see you're here from Tokyo," the old fellow said. "I 
went there once. Just once. They serve great pork." 

"They do?" I asked, uncertain how to answer him. 

"I didn't like much of what I ate in Tokyo, but the pork was delicious. 
I expect they have some special way of rearing 'em, eh?" 

I said I didn’t know, it was the first I'd heard of it. "When was that, by 

 



the way, when you went to Tokyo?" 

"Hmm, let's see," he said, cocking his head, "was it the time His 
Majesty the Crown prince got married? My son was in Tokyo and said 
I ought to see the place at least once. That must have been 1959." 

"Oh, well then, sure, pork must have been good in Tokyo back then," I 
said. 

"How about these days?" he asked. 

I wasn't sure, I said, but I hadn't heard anything special about it. This 
seemed to disappoint him. He gave every sign of wanting to continue 
our conversation, but I told him I had to catch a bus and started 
walking in the direction of the road. Patches of fog remained floating 
on the path where it skirted the stream, but the breeze carried them 
over to the steep flanks of a nearby mountain. Every now and then as I 
walked along I would stop, turn, and heave a deep sigh for no 
particular reason. I felt as though I had arrived on a planet where the 
gravity was a little different. Yes, of course, I told myself, feeling sad: 
I was in the outside world now. 

Back at the dorm by 4.30, I changed straight away and left for the 
record shop in Shinjuku to put in my hours. I looked after the shop 
from six o'clock to 10.30 and sold a few records, but mainly I sat there 
in a daze, watching an incredible variety of people streaming by 
outside. There were families and couples and drunks and gangsters 
and lively-looking girls in short skirts and bearded hippies and bar 
hostesses and some indefinable types. Whenever I put on hard rock, 
hippies and runaway kids would gather outside to dance and sniff 
paint thinner or just sit on the ground doing nothing in particular, and 
when I put on Tony Bennett, they would disappear. 

Next door was a shop where a middle-aged, sleepy-eyed man sold 
"adult toys". I couldn’t imagine why anyone would want the kind of 
sex paraphernalia he had there, but he seemed to do a roaring trade. In 
the alley diagonally across from the record shop I saw a drunken 
student vomiting. In the game arcade across from us at another angle. 

 



the cook from a local restaurant was killing time on his break with a 
game of bingo that took cash bets. Beneath the eaves of a shop that 
had closed for the night, a swarthy homeless guy was crouching, 
motionless. A girl with pale pink lipstick who couldn't have been more 
than 12 or 13 came in and asked me to play the Rolling Stones' 
"Jumpin' Jack Flash". When I found the record and put it on for her, 
she started snapping her fingers to the rhythm and shaking her hips as 
she danced around the shop. Then she asked me for a cigarette. I gave 
her one of the manager's, which she smoked gratefully, and when the 
record ended she left the shop without so much as a "thank you". 
Every 15 minutes or so I would hear the siren of an ambulance or 
police car. Three drunk company executives in suits and ties came by, 
laughing at the top of their voices every time they yelled "Nice arse!" 
at a pretty, long-haired girl in a phone box. 

The more I watched, the more confused I became. What the hell was 
this all about? I wondered. What could it possibly mean? 

The manager came back from dinner and said to me, "Hey, know 
what, Watanabe? Night before last I made it with the boutique chick." 
For some time now he had had his eye on the girl who worked at a 
boutique nearby, and every once in a while he would take a record 
from the shop as a gift for her. 

"Good for you," I said to him, whereupon he told me every last detail 
of his conquest. 

"If you really wanna make a chick, here's what ya gotta do," 
he began, very pleased with himself. "First, ya gotta give 'er presents. 
Then ya gotta get 'er drunk. I mean really drunk. Then ya just gotta do 
it. It's easy. See what I mean?" 

Head mixed up as ever, I boarded the commuter train and went back 
to my dorm. Closing the curtains, I turned off the lights, stretched out 
in bed, and felt as if Naoko might come crawling in beside me at any 
moment. With my eyes closed, I could feel the soft swell of her 
breasts on my chest, hear her whispering to me, and feel the outline of 

 



her body in my hands. In the darkness, I returned to that small world 
of hers. I smelled the meadow grass, heard the rain at night. I thought 
of her naked, as I had seen her in the moonlight, and pictured her 
cleaning the aviary and tending to the vegetables with that soft, 
beautiful body of hers wrapped in the yellow raincape. Clutching my 
erection. I thought of Naoko until I came. This seemed to clear my 
brain a little, but it didn't help me sleep. I felt exhausted, desperate for 
sleep, but it simply refused to cooperate. 

I got out of bed and stood at the window, my unfocused eyes 
wandering out towards the flagpole. Without the national flag attached 
to it, the pole looked like a gigantic white bone thrusting up into the 
darkness of night. What was Naoko doing now? I wondered. Of 
course, she must be sleeping, sleeping deeply, shrouded in the 
darkness of that curious little world of hers. Let her be spared from 
anguished dreams, I found myself hoping. 

 



In P.E. class the next morning, Thursday, I swam several lengths of 
the 50-metre pool. The vigorous exercise cleared my head some more 
and gave me an appetite. After eating a good-sized lunch at a student 
restaurant known for its good-sized lunches, I was on my way to the 
literature department library to do some research when I bumped into 
Midori Kobayashi. She had someone with her, a petite girl with 
glasses, but when she spotted me, she approached me alone. 

"Where you going?" she asked. 

"Lit. library," I said. 

"Why don't you forget it and come have lunch with me?" "I've already 
eaten." 

"So what? Eat again." 

We ended up going to a nearby cafe where she had a plate of curry 
and I had a cup of coffee. She wore a white, longsleeved shirt under a 
yellow woollen vest with a fish knitted into the design, a narrow gold 
necklace, and a Disney watch. She seemed to enjoy the curry and 
drank three glasses of water with it. 

"Where've you been?" Midori asked. "I don’t know how many times I 
called." 

"Was there something you wanted to talk about?" "Nothing special. I 
just called." 

"I see." 

 



"You see what?" 

"Nothing. Just "I see'," I said. "Any fires lately?" 

"That was fun, wasn't it? It didn't do much damage, but 
that smoke made it feel real. Great stuff." Midori gulped another glass 
of water, took a breath and studied my face for a while. "Hey, what’s 
wrong with you?" she asked. "You’ve got this spaced-out face. Your 
eyes aren't focused." 

"I'm OK," I said. "I just came back from a trip and I'm tired." 

"You look like you've just seen a ghost." "I see." 

"Hey, do you have "German and R.E. "Can you skip 'en: "Not 
German. I've "When’s it over?" "Two." 

"OK. How about going into the city with me after that some drinks ?" 
"At two in the afternoon?!" 

"For a change, why not? You look so spaced. Come on, come drinking 
with me and get a little life into you. That’s what I want to do - drink 
with you and get some life into myself. 

What do you say?" 

"OK. let’s go," I said with a sigh. "I’ll look for you in the Lit. quad at 
two." 

After German we caught a bus to Shinjuku and went to an 
underground bar called DUG behind the Kinokuniya bookshop. We 
each started with two vodka and tonics. 

"I come here once in a while," she said. "They don't make you feel 
embarrassed to be drinking in the afternoon." 

"Do you drink in the afternoon a lot?" 

"Sometimes," she said, rattling the ice in her glass. "Sometimes, when 
the world gets too hard to live in, I come here for a vodka and tonic." 
"Does the world get hard to live in?" 

"Sometimes," said Midori. "I’ve got my own special little problems." 
"Like what?" 

"Like family, like boyfriends, like irregular periods. Stuff." "So have 
another drink." 

 



"I will." 

I beckoned to the waiter and ordered two more vodka and tonics. 
"Remember how, when you came over that Sunday, you kissed me?" 
Midori asked. "I've been thinking about it. It was nice. Really nice." 
"That's nice." 

""That’s nice’," she mimicked. "The way you talk is so weird!" 

"It is?" 

"Anyway, I was thinking, that time. I was thinking how great it would 
be if that had been the first time in my life a boy had kissed me. If I 
could switch around the order of my life, I would absolutely, 
absolutely make that my first kiss. And then I would live the rest of 
my life thinking stuff like: Hey, I wonder whatever happened to that 
boy named Watanabe I gave my first kiss to on the laundry deck, now 
that he’s 58? Wouldn’t that be great?" 

"Yeah, really," I said, cracking a pistachio nut. 

"Hey, what is it with you? Why are you so spaced out? You still 
haven't answered me." 

I probably still haven't completely adapted to the world.’ I said after 
giving it some thought. "I don't know, I feel like this isn't the real 
world. The people, the scene: they just don’t seem real to me." 

Midori rested an elbow on the bar and looked at me. "There was 
something like that in a Jim Morrison song. I'm pretty sure." 

"People are strange when you're a stranger." 

"Peace," said Midori. 

Peace," I said. 

"You really ought to go to Uruguay with me," Midori said, still 
leaning on the bar. "Girlfriend, family, university - just dump 'em all." 
"Not a bad idea," I said, laughing. 

"Don't you think it would be wonderful to get rid of everything and 
everybody and just go somewhere where you don't know a soul? 
Sometimes I feel like doing that. I really, really want to do it 
sometimes. Like, suppose you whisked me somewhere far, far away. 

 



I'd make lots of babies for you as tough as little bulls. And we’d all 
live happily ever after, rolling on the floor." 

I laughed and drank my third vodka and tonic. 

"I guess you don't really want lots of babies as tough as little bulls 
yet," said Midori. 

"I'm intrigued," I said. "I'd like to see what they look like." 

"That's OK, you don't have to want them," said Midori, eating a 
pistachio. "Here I am, drinking in the afternoon, saying whatever pops 
into my head: "I wanna dump everything and run off somewhere.' 
What's the point of going to Uruguay? All they've got there is donkey 
shit." 

"You may be right." 

"Donkey shit everywhere. Here a shit, there a shit, the whole world is 
donkey shit. Hey, I can't open this. You take it." Midori handed me a 
pistachio nut. I straggled with it until I cracked it open. "But oh, what 
a relief it was last Sunday! Going up to the laundry deck with you, 
watching the fire, drinking beer, singing songs. I don't know how long 
it's been since I had such a total sense of relief. People are always 
trying to force stuff on me. The minute they see me they start telling 
me what to do. At least you don't try to force stuff on me." 

"I don't know you well enough to force stuff on you." 

"You mean, if you knew me better, you'd force stuff on me like 
everyone else?" 

"It's possible," I said. "That's how people live in the real world: 
forcing stuff on each other." 

"You wouldn’t do that. I can tell. I'm an expert when it comes to 
forcing stuff and having stuff forced on you. You're not the type. 
That's why I can relax with you. Do you have any idea how many 
people there are in the world who like to force stuff on people and 
have stuff forced on them? Tons! And then they make a big fuss, like 
"I forced her', "You forced me!' That's what they like. But I don’t like 
it. I just do it because I have to." 

 



"What kind of stuff do you force on people or they force on you?" 
Midori put an ice-cube in her mouth and sucked on it for a while. 

"Do you want to get to know me better?" she asked. "Yeah, kind of." 
"Hey, look, I just asked you, "Do you want to get to know me better?' 
What sort of answer is that?" 

"Yes, Midori, I would like to get to know you better," I said. "Really?" 
"Yes, really." 

"Even if you had to turn your eyes away from what you saw? 

'Are you that bad?" 

"Well, in a way," Midori said with a frown. "I want another drink." 

I called the waiter and ordered a fourth round of drinks. Until they 
came, Midori cupped her chin in her hand with her elbow on the bar. I 
kept quiet and listened to Thelonious Monk playing "Honeysuckle 
Rose". There were five or six other customers in the place, but we 
were the only ones drinking alcohol. The rich smell of coffee gave the 
gloomy interior an intimate atmosphere. 

"Are you free this Sunday?" Midori asked. 

"I think I told you before. I'm always free on Sunday. Until I go to 
work at six." 

"OK. then, this Sunday, will you hang out with me?" 

"Sure," I said. 

"I'll pick you up at your dorm Sunday morning. I'm not sure exactly 
what time, though. Is that OK?" 

"Fine," I said. "No problem." 

"Now, let me ask you: do you have any idea what I would like to do 
right now?" 

"I can't imagine." 

"Well, first of all, I want to lie down in a big, wide, fluffy bed. I want 
to get all comfy and drunk and not have any donkey shit anywhere 
nearby, and I want to have you lying down next to me. And then, little 
by little, you take off my clothes. Sooo tenderly. The way a mother 
undresses a little child. Sooo softly." 

 



"Hmm ..." 

"And I'm just spacing out and feeling really nice until, all of a sudden 
I realize what's happening and I yell at you "Stop it, Watanabe!’ And 
then I say "I really like you, Watanabe, but I'm seeing someone else. I 
can't do this. I'm very proper about these things, believe it or not, so 
please stop.' But you 
don't stop." 

"But I would stop," I said. 

"I know that. Never mind, this is just my fantasy," said Midori. "So 
then you show it to me. Your thing. Sticking right up. I immediately 
cover my eyes, of course, but I can't help seeing it for a split second. 
And I say, "Stop it! Don't do that! I don't want anything so big and 
hard!'" 

"It's not so big. Just ordinary." 

"Never mind, this is a fantasy. So then you put on this really sad face, 
and I feel sorry for you and try to comfort you. There there, poor 
thing." 

"And you're telling me that's what you want to do now?" "That's it." 

"Oh boy." 

We left the bar after five rounds of vodka and tonic. When I tried to 
pay, Midori slapped my hand and paid with a brand-new #10,000 note 
she took from her purse. 

"It's OK," she said. "I just got paid, and I invited you. Of course, if 
you're a card-carrying fascist and you refuse to let a woman buy you a 
drink. .." 

"No no. I’m OK." 

"And I didn't let you put it in, either." "Because it’s so big and hard," I 
said. 

"Right," said Midori. "Because it’s so big and hard." 

A little drunk, Midori missed one step, and we almost fell back down 
the stairs. The layer of clouds that had darkened the sky was gone 

 



now, and the late afternoon sun poured its gentle light on the city 
streets. Midori and I wandered around for a while. She said she 
wanted to climb a tree, but unfortunately there were no climbable trees 
in Shinjuku, and the Shinjuku Imperial Gardens were closing. 

"Too bad," said Midori. "I love climbing trees." 

We continued walking and window-shopping, and soon the street 
scene seemed more real to me than it had before. 

"I'm glad I ran into you," I said. "I think I'm a little more adapted to 
the world now." 

Midori stopped short and peered at me. "It's true," she said. "Your 
eyes are much more in focus than they were. See? Hanging out with 
me does you good." 

"No doubt about it," I said. 

At 5.30 Midori said she had to go home and make dinner. I said I 
would take a bus back to my dorm, and saw her as far as the station. 
"Know what I want to do now?" Midori asked me as she was leaving. 

"I have absolutely no idea what you could be thinking," I said. 

"I want you and me to be captured by pirates. Then they strip us and 
press us together face to face all naked and wind these ropes around 
us." 

"Why would they do a thing like that?" 

"Perverted pirates," she said. 

"You're the perverted one," I said. 

"So then they lock us in the hold and say, "In one hour, we're gonna 
throw you into the sea, so have a good time 
until then’." 

"And ... ?" 

"So we enjoy ourselves for an hour, rolling all over the place and 
twisting our bodies." 

"And that's the main thing you want to do now?" 

"That’s it." 

"Oh boy," I said, shaking my head. 

 



Midori came for me at 9.30 on Sunday morning. I had just woken up 
and hadn't washed my face. Somebody pounded on my door, yelling 
"Hey, Watanabe, it's a woman!" I went down to the lobby to find 
Midori sitting there with her legs crossed wearing an incredibly short 
denim skirt, yawning. Every student passing by on his way to 
breakfast slowed down to stare at her long, slim legs. She did have 
really nice legs. 

"Am I too early?" she asked. "I bet you just woke up." 

"Can you give me 15 minutes? I'll wash my face and shave." "I don’t 
mind waiting, but all these guys are staring at 
my legs." 

"What d’you expect, coming into a men's dorm in such a short skirt? 
Of course they're going to stare." 

"Oh, well, it's OK. I'm wearing really cute panties today - all pink and 
frilly and lacy." 

"That just makes it worse," I said with a sigh. I went back to my room 
and washed and shaved as fast as I could, put on a blue button-down 
shirt and a grey tweed sports coat, then went back down and ushered 
Midori out through the dorm gate. I was in a cold sweat. 

"Tell me, Watanabe," Mdori said, looking up at the dorm buildings, 
"do all the guys in here wank - rub-a-dub-dub?" "Probably," I said. 

"Do guys think about girls when they do that?" 

"I suppose so. I kind of doubt that anyone thinks about the stock 
market or verb conjugations or the Suez Canal when they wank. Nope, 
I'm pretty sure just about everybody thinks about girls." 

"The Suez Canal?" 

"For example." 

"So I suppose they think about particular girls, right?" "Shouldn't you 
be asking your boyfriend about that?" I 

said. "Why should I have to explain stuff like this to you on a Sunday 
morning?" 

 



"I was just curious," she said. "Besides, he’d get angry if I asked him 
about stuff like that. He'd say girls aren't supposed to ask all those 
questions." 

"A perfectly normal point of view. I'd say." 

"But I want to know. This is pure curiosity. Do guys think about 
particular girls when they wank?" 

I gave up trying to avoid the question. "Well, I do at least. 

I don't know about anybody else." 

"Have you ever thought about me while you were doing it? 

Tell me the truth. I won't be angry." 

"No, I haven't, to tell the truth," I answered honestly. "Why not? 
Aren't I attractive enough?" 

"Oh, you're attractive, all right. You're cute, and sexy outfits look 
great on you." 

"So why don't you think about me?" 

"Well, first of all, I think of you as a friend, so I don't want to involve 
you in my sexual fantasies, and second -" 

"You've got somebody else you're supposed to be thinking about." 
"That's about the size of it," I said. 

"You have good manners even when it comes to something like this," 
Midori said. "That's what I like about you. Still, couldn’t you allow me 
just one brief appearance? I want to be in one of your sexual fantasies 
or daydreams or whatever you call them. I'm asking you because we're 
friends. Who else can I ask for something like that? I can't just walk 
up to anyone and say, "When you wank tonight, will you please think 
of me for a second?' It's because I think of you as a friend that I'm 
asking. And I want you to tell me later what it was like. You know, 
what you did and stuff." 

I let out a sigh. 

"You can't put it in, though. Because we're just friends. Right? As 
long as you don't put it in, you can do anything you like, think 
anything you want." 

 



"I don't know. I've never done it with so many restrictions before," I 
said. 

"Will you just think about me?" 

"All right. I’ll think about you." 

"You know, Watanabe, I don’t want you to get the wrong impression - 
that I'm a nymphomaniac or frustrated or a tease or anything. I'm just 
interested in that stuff. I want to know about it. I grew up surrounded 
by nothing but girls in a girls' school, you know that. I want to find out 
what guys are thinking and how their bodies are put together. And not 
just from pull-out sections in the women's magazines but actual case 
studies." 

"Case studies?" I groaned. 

"But my boyfriend doesn't like it when I want to know things or try 
things. He gets angry, calls me a nympho or crazy. He won't even let 
me give him a blow job. Now, that's one thing I'm dying to study." 
"Uh-huh." 

"Do you hate getting blow jobs?" 

"No, not really, I don't hate it." 

"Would you say you like it?" 

"Yeah, I’d say that. But can we talk about this next time? Here it is, a 
really nice Sunday morning, and I don't want to ruin it talking about 
wanking and blow jobs. Let's talk about something else. Is your 
boyfriend at the same university as us?" 

"Nope, he goes to another one, of course. We met at school during a 
club activity. I was in the girls' school, he was in the boys', and you 
know how they do those things, joint concerts and stuff. We got 
serious after our exams, though. Hey, Watanabe." 

"What?" 

"You only have to do it once. Just think about me, OK?" 

"OK. I’ll give it a try, next time," I said, throwing in the towel. 

We took a commuter train to Ochanomizu. When we transferred at 

 



Shinjuku I bought a thin sandwich at a stand in the station to make up 
for the breakfast I hadn't eaten. The coffee I had with it tasted like 
boiled printer's ink. The Sunday morning trains were filled with 
couples and families on outings. A group of boys with baseball bats 
and matching uniforms scampered around inside the carriage. Several 
of the girls on the train had short skirts on, but none as short as 
Midori's. Midori would pull on hers every now and then as it rode up. 
Some of the men stared at her thighs, which made me feel uneasy, but 
she didn’t seem to mind. 

"Know what I'd like to do right now?" she whispered when we had 
been travelling a while. 

"No idea," I said. "But please, don't talk about that stuff here. 
Somebody'll hear you." 

"Too bad. This one's kind of wild," Midori said with obvious 
disappointment. 

'Anyway, why are we going to Ochanomizu?" 

"Just come along, you'll see." 

With all the cram schools around Ochanomizu Station, on Sunday the 
area was full of school kids on their way to classes or exam practice. 
Midori barged through the crowds clutching the strap of her shoulder 
bag with one hand and my hand with the other. 

Without warning, she asked me, "Hey, Watanabe, can you explain the 
difference between the English present subjunctive and past 
subjunctive?" 

"I think I can," I said. 

"Let me ask you, then, what possible use is stuff like that for everyday 
life?" 

"None at all," I said. "It may not serve any concrete purpose, but it 
does give you some kind of training to help you grasp things in 
general more systematically." 

Midori gave that a moment's serious thought. "You're amazing," she 
said. "That never occurred to me before. I always thought of things 

 



like the subjunctive case and differential calculus and chemical 
symbols as totally useless. A pain in the neck. So I've always ignored 
them. Now I have to wonder if my whole life has been a mistake." 
"You've ignored them?" 

"Yeah. Like, for me, they didn’t exist. I don't have the slightest idea 
what "sine' and "cosine' mean." 

"That's incredible! How did you pass your exams? How did you get 
into university?" 

"Don't be silly," said Midori. "You don’t have to know anything to 
pass entrance exams! All you need is a little intuition - and I have 
great intuition. "Choose the correct answer from the following three.' I 
know immediately which one is right." 

"My intuition's not as good as yours, so I have to be systematic to 
some extent. Like the way a magpie collects bits of glass in a hollow 
tree." 

"Does it serve some purpose?" 

"I wonder. It probably makes it easier to do some things." "What kind 
of things? Give me an example." "Metaphysical thought, say. 
Mastering several languages." "What good does that do?" 

"It depends on the person who does it. It serves a purpose for some, 

and not for others. But mainly it's training. Whether 

it serves a purpose or not is another question. Like I said." "Hmm," 

said Midori, seemingly impressed. She led me by 

the hand down the hill. "You know, Watanabe, you're really 

good at explaining things to people." 

"I wonder," I said. 

"It's true. I've asked hundreds of people what use the 
English subjunctive is, and not one of them gave me a good, 
clear answer like yours. Not even English teachers. They either 
got confused or angry or laughed it off. Nobody ever gave me 
a decent answer. If somebody like you had been around when 
I asked my question, and had given me a proper explanation, 

 



even I might have been interested in the subjunctive. Damn!" "Hmm," 
I said. 

"Have you ever read Das Kapital?" 

"Yeah. Not the whole thing, of course, but parts, like most 
people." 

"Did you understand it?" 

"I understood some bits, not others. You have to acquire the 
necessary intellectual apparatus to read a book like Das Kapital. 

I think I understand the general idea of Marxism, though." "Do you 
think a first-year student who hasn't read books 

like that can understand Das Kapital just by reading it?" "That's pretty 
nigh impossible. I'd say." 

"You know, when I went to university I joined a folk-music 
club. I just wanted to sing songs. But the members were a load of 
frauds. I get goose-bumps just thinking about them. The first thing 
they tell you when you enter the club is you have to read Marx. "Read 
page so-and-so to such-and-such for next time.' Somebody gave a 
lecture on how folk songs have to be deeply involved with society and 
the radical movement. So, what the hell, I went home and tried as hard 
as I could to read it, but I didn’t understand a thing. It was worse than 
the subjunctive. I gave up after three pages. So I went to the next 
week's meeting like a good little scout and said I had read it, but I 
couldn't understand it. From that point on they treated me like an idiot. 
I had no critical awareness of the class straggle, they said, I was a 
social cripple. I mean, this was serious. And all because I said I 
couldn't understand a piece of writing. Don't you think they were 
terrible?" 

"Uh-huh," I said. 

"And their so-called discussions were terrible, too. Everybody would 
use big words and pretend they knew what was going on. But I would 
ask questions whenever I didn't understand something. "What is this 
imperialist exploitation stuff you're talking about? Is it connected 

 



somehow to the East India Company?' "Does smashing the 
educational-industrial complex mean we're not supposed to work for a 
company after we graduate?' And stuff like that. But nobody was 
willing to explain anything to me. Far from it - they got really angry. 
Can you believe it?" 

"Yeah, I can," I said. 

"One guy yelled at me, "You stupid bitch, how do you live like that 
with nothing in your brain?' Well, that did it. I wasn't going to put up 
with that. OK, so I'm not so smart. I'm working class. But it's the 
working class that keeps the world running, and it's the working 
classes that get exploited. What kind of revolution is it that just throws 
out big words that working-class people can't understand? What kind 
of crap social revolution is that? I mean. I'd like to make the world a 
better place, too. If somebody's really being exploited, we've got to 
put a stop to it. That's what I believe, and that's why I ask questions. 
Am I right, or what?" 

"You're right." 

"So that's when it hit me. These guys are fakes. All they've got on 
their minds is impressing the new girls with the big words they're so 
proud of, while sticking their hands up their skirts. And when they 
graduate, they cut their hair short and march off to work for 
Mitsubishi or IBM or Fuji Bank. They marry pretty wives who've 
never read Marx and have kids they give fancy new names to that are 
enough to make you puke. Smash what educational-industrial 
complex? Don't make me laugh! And the new members were just as 
bad. They didn't understand a thing either, but they pretended to and 
they were laughing at me. After the meeting, they told me, "Don't be 
silly! So what if you don't understand? Just agree with everything they 
say.’ Hey, Watanabe, I've got stuff that made me even madder than 
that. Wanna hear it?" 

"Sure, why not?" 

"Well, one time they called a late-night political meeting, and they 

 



told each girl to make 20 rice balls for midnight snacks. I mean, talk 
about sex discrimination! I decided to keep quiet for a change, though, 
and showed up like a good girl with my 20 rice balls, complete with 
umeboshi inside and nori outside. And what do you think I got for my 
efforts? Afterwards people complained because my rice balls had only 
umeboshi inside, and I hadn't brought anything along to go with them! 
The other girls stuffed theirs with cod roe and salmon, and they 
included nice, thick slices of fried egg. I got so furious I couldn't talk! 
Who the hell do these revolution’-mongers think they are making a 
fuss over rice balls? They should be grateful for umeboshi and nori. 
Think of the children starving in India!" 

I laughed. "So then what happened with your club?" 

"I left in June, I was so furious," Midori said. "Most of these student 
types are total frauds. They're scared to death somebody's gonna find 
out they don't know something. They all read the same books and they 
all spout the same slogans, aid they love listening to John Coltrane 
and seeing Pasolini movies. You call that "revolution?"' 

"Hey, don’t ask me, I've never actually seen a revolution." "Well, if 
that's revolution, you can stick it. They'd probably shoot me for 
putting umeboshi in my rice balls. They’d shoot you, too, for 
understanding the subjunctive." "It could happen." 

"Believe me, I know what I'm talking about. I'm working class. 
Revolution or not, the working class will just keep on scraping a 
living in the same old shitholes. And what is a revolution? It sure as 
hell isn't just changing the name on city hall. But those guys don't 
know that - those guys with their big words. Tell me, Watanabe, have 
you ever seen a taxman?" 

"Never." 

"Well I have. Lots of times. They come barging in and acting big. 
"What's this ledger for?' "Hey, you keep pretty sloppy records.' "You 
call this a business expense?' "I want to see all your receipts right 
now.' Meanwhile, we're crouching in the comer, and when suppertime 

 



comes we have to treat them to sushi deluxe - home delivered. Let me 
tell you, though, my father never once cheated on his taxes. That's just 
how he is, a real old-fashioned straight arrow. But tell that to the 
taxman. All he can do is dig and dig and dig and dig. "Income's a little 
low here, don't you think?' Well, of course the income's low when 
you're not making any money! I wanted to scream: "Go do this where 
they've got some money!' Do you think the taxman's attitude would 
change if there was a revolution ?" 

"Highly doubtful, highly doubtful." 

"That does it, then. I'm not going to believe in any damned revolution. 
Love is all I'm going to believe in." 

"Peace," I said. 

"Peace," said Midori. 

"Hey, where are we going?" I asked. 

"The hospital," she said. "My father's there. It's my turn to stay with 
him all day." 

"Your father?! I thought he was in Uruguay!" 

"That was a lie," said Midori in a matter-of-fact tone. "He's been 
screaming about going to Uruguay forever, but he could never do that. 
He can hardly get himself out of Tokyo." 

"How bad is he?" I asked. 

"It's just a matter of time," she said. 

We walked on in silence. 

"I know what I'm talking about. It's the same thing my mother had. A 
brain tumour. Can you believe it? It's hardly been two years since she 
died of a brain tumour, and now he's got one." 

The University Hospital corridors were noisy and crowded with 
weekend visitors and patients who had less serious symptoms, and 
everywhere hung that special hospital smell, a cloud of disinfectant 
and visitors' bouquets, and urine and mattresses, while nurses surged 
back and forth with a dry clattering of heels. 

Midori's father was in a semi-private room in the bed nearest the door. 

 



Stretched out, he looked like some tiny creature with a fatal wound. 
He lay on his side, limp, the drooping left arm inert, jabbed with an 
intravenous needle. He was a small, skinny man who gave the 
impression that he would only get smaller and thinner. A white 
bandage encircled his head, and his pasty white arms were dotted with 
the holes left by injections or intravenous drips. His half-open eyes 
stared at a fixed point in space, bloodshot spheres that twitched in our 
direction when we entered the room. For some ten seconds they stayed 
focused on us, then drifted back to that fixed point in space. 

You knew when you saw those eyes he was going to die soon. There 
was no sign of life in his flesh, just the barest trace of what had once 
been a life. His body was like a dilapidated old house from which all 
the fixtures and fittings have been removed, awaiting its final 
demolition. Around the dry lips clumps of whiskers sprouted like 
weeds. So, I thought, even after so much of a man's life force has been 
lost, his beard continues to grow. 

Midori said hello to a fat man in the bed by the window. He nodded 
and smiled, apparently unable to talk. He coughed a few times and. 
after sipping some water from a glass by his pillow, he shifted his 
weight and rolled on his side, turning to gaze out of the window. 
Beyond the window could be seen only a pole and some power lines, 
nothing more, not even a cloud in the sky. 

"How are you feeling. Daddy?" said Midori, speaking into her father's 
ear as if testing a microphone. "How are you today?" 

Her father moved his lips. <Not good> he said, not so much speaking 
the words as forming them from dried air at the back of his throat. 
<Head> he said. 

"You have a headache?" Midori asked. 

<Yuh > he said, apparently unable to pronounce more than a syllable 
or two at a time. 

"Well, no wonder," she said, "you've just had your head cut open. Of 
course it hurts. Too bad, but try to be brave. This is my friend. 

 



Watanabe." 

"Glad to meet you," I said. Midori's father opened his lips halfway, 
then closed them again. 

Midori gestured towards a plastic stool near the foot of the bed and 
suggested I sit down. I did as I was told. Midori gave her father a 
drink of water and asked if he'd like a piece of fruit or some jellied 
fruit dessert. <No> he said, and when Midori insisted that he had to 
eat something, he said <1 ate). 

A water bottle, a glass, a dish and a small clock stood on a night table 
near the head of the bed. From a large paper bag under the table, 
Midori took some fresh pyjamas, underwear, and other things, 
straightened them out and put them into the locker by the door. There 
was food for the patient at the bottom of the bag: two grapefruits, fruit 
jelly and three cucumbers. 

"Cucumbers?! What are these doing in here?" Midori asked. "I can't 
imagine what my sister was thinking. I told her on the phone exactly 
what I wanted her to buy, and I'm sure I never mentioned cucumbers! 
She was supposed to bring kiwi fruit." 

"Maybe she misunderstood you," I suggested. 

"Yeah, maybe, but if she had thought about it she would have realized 
that cucumbers couldn’t be right. I mean, what's a patient supposed to 
do? Sit in bed chewing on raw cucumbers? Hey, Daddy, want a 
cucumber?" 

<No> said Midori's father. 

Midori sat by the head of the bed, telling her father snippets of news 
from home. The TV picture had gone fuzzy and she had called the 
repairman; their aunt from Takaido would visit in a few days; the 
chemist, Mr Miyawaki, had fallen off his bike: stuff like that. Her 
father responded with grunts. 

"Are you sure you don't want anything to eat?" 

<No> her father answered. 

"How about you, Watanabe? Some grapefruit?" "No," I answered. 

 



A few minutes later, Midori took me to the TV room and smoked a 
cigarette on the sofa. Three patients in pyjamas were also smoking 
there and watching some kind of political discussion programme. 

"Hey," whispered Midori with a twinkle in her eye. "That old guy with 
the crutches has been looking at my legs ever since we came in. The 
one with glasses in the blue pyjamas." 

"What do you expect, wearing a skirt like that?" 

"It's nice, though. I bet they're all bored. It probably does them good. 
Maybe the excitement helps them get better faster." 

"As long as it doesn't have the opposite effect." 

Midori stared at the smoke rising from her cigarette. 

"You know," she said, "my father's not such a bad guy. I get angry 
with him sometimes because he says terrible things, but deep down 
he's honest and he really loved my mother. In his own way, he's lived 
life with all the intensity he could muster. He's a little weak, maybe, 
and he has absolutely no head for business, and people don't like him 
very much, but he's a hell of a lot better than the cheats and liars who 
go round smoothing things over because they're so slick. I'm as bad as 
he is about not backing down once I've said something, so we fight a 
lot, but really, he's not a bad guy." 

Midori took my hand as if she were picking up something someone 
had dropped in the street, and placed it on her lap. Half my hand lay 
on the skirt, the rest touching her thigh. She looked into my eyes for 
some time. 

"Sorry to bring you to a place like this," she said, "but would 
you mind staying with me a little longer?" 

"I'll stay with you all day if you want," I said. "Until five." I like 
spending time with you, and I've got nothing else to do." 

"How do you usually spend your Sundays?" 

"Doing my laundry," I said. "And ironing." 

"I don't suppose you want to tell me too much about her ... your 
girlfriend?" 

 



"No, I guess not. It's complicated, and I, kind of, don't think I could 
explain it very well." 

"That's OK. You don't have to explain anything," said Midori. "But do 
you mind if I tell you what I imagine is going on?" 

"No, go ahead. I suspect anything you’d imagine would have to be 
interesting." 

"I think she's a married woman." 

"You do?" 

"Yeah, she's thirty-two or -three and she's rich and beautiful and she 
wears fur coats and Charles Jourdan shoes and silk underwear and 
she's hungry for sex and she likes to do really yucky things. The two 
of you meet on weekday afternoons and devour each other's bodies. 
But her husband's home on Sundays, so she can't see you. Am I 
right?" 

"Very, very interesting." 

"She has you tie her up and blindfold her and lick every square inch of 
her body. Then she makes you put weird things inside her and she gets 
into these incredible positions like a contortionist and you take 
pictures of her with a Polaroid camera." 

"Sounds like fun." 

"She's dying for it all the time, so she does everything she can think 
of. And she thinks about it every day. She's got nothing but free time, 
so she's always planning: Hmm, next time Watanabe comes, we'll do 
this, or we'll do that. You get in bed and she goes crazy, trying all 
these positions and coming three times in each one. And she says to 
you, "Don't I have a sensational body? You can't be satisfied with 
young girls any more. Young girls won't do this for you, will they? Or 
this. Feel good? But don't come yet!"' 

"You've watched too many porno movies," I said with a laugh. 

"You think so? I was kind of worried about that. But I love 
porn films. Take me to one next time, OK?" 

"Fine," I said. "Next time you're free." 

 



"Really? I can hardly wait. Let's go to a real S&M one, with whips 
and, like, they make the girl pee in front of everyone. 

That's my favourite." 

"We’ll do it." 

"You know what I like best about porn cinemas?" "I couldn’t begin to 
guess." 

"Whenever a sex scene starts, you can hear this "Gulp!' sound when 
everybody swallows all at once," said Midori. "I love that "Gulp!' It's 
so sweet!" 

Back in the hospital room, Midori aimed a stream of talk at her father 
again, and he would either grunt in response or say nothing. Around 
eleven the wife of the man in the other bed came to change her 
husband's pyjamas and peel fruit for him and so on. She had a round 
face and seemed like a nice person, and she and Midori shared a lot of 
small talk. A nurse showed up with a new intravenous drip and talked 
a little while with Midori and the wife before she left. I let my eyes 
wander around the room and out the window to the power lines. 
Sparrows would turn up every now and then and perch on them. 
Midori talked to her father and wiped the sweat from his brow and 
helped him spit phlegm into a tissue and chatted with the 
neighbouring patient's wife and the nurse and sent an occasional 
remark my way and checked the intravenous contraption. 

The doctor did his rounds at 11.30, so Midori and I stepped outside to 
wait in the corridor. When he came out, Midori asked him how her 
father was doing. 

"Well, he's just come out of surgery, and we've got him on painkillers 
so, well, he's pretty drained," said the doctor. "I'll need another two or 
three days to evaluate the results of the operation. If it went well, he'll 
be OK, and if it didn't, we’ll have to make some decisions at that 
point." 

"You’re not going to open his head up again, are you?" 

 



"I really can't say until the time comes," said the doctor. "Wow, that's 
some short skirt you're wearing!" 

"Nice, huh?" 

"What do you do on stairways?" the doctor asked. 

"Nothing special. I let it all hang out," said Midori. The nurse 
chuckled behind the doctor. 

"Incredible. You ought to come and let us open your head one of these 
days to see what's going on in there. Do me a favour and use the lifts 
while you're in the hospital. I can't afford to have any more patients. 
I'm way too busy as it is." 

Soon after the doctor's rounds it was lunchtime. A nurse was 
circulating from room to room pushing a trolley loaded with meals. 
Midori's father was given pottage, fruit, boiled, deboned fish, and 
vegetables that had been ground into some kind of jelly. Midori turned 
him on his back and raised him up using the handle at the foot of the 
bed. She fed him the soup with a spoon. After five or six swallows, he 
turned his face aside and said (No more>. 

You've got to eat at least this much." Midori san <Later> he said. 
"You're hopeless - if you don't eat properly, you'll never get your 
strength back," she said. "Don't you have to pee yet?" <No> he said. 
"Hey, Watanabe, let's go down to the cafeteria." 

I agreed to go, but in fact I didn’t much feel like eating. The cafeteria 
was packed with doctors, nurses and visitors. Long lines of chairs and 
tables filled the huge, windowless underground cavern where every 
mouth seemed to be eating or talking - about sickness, no doubt, the 
voices echoing and re-echoing as in a tunnel. Now and then the PA 
system would break through the reverberation with calls for a doctor 
or nurse. While I laid claim to a table, Midori bought two set meals 
and carried them over on an aluminium tray. Croquettes with cream 
sauce, potato salad, shredded cabbage, boiled vegetables, rice and 
miso soup: these were lined up in the tray in the same white plastic 
dishes they used for patients. I ate about half of mine and left the rest. 

 



Midori seemed to enjoy her meal to the last mouthful. 

"Not hungry?" she asked, sipping hot tea. "Not really," I said. 

"It's the hospital," she said, scanning the cafeteria. "This always 
happens when people aren't used to the place. The smells, the sounds, 
the stale air, patients' faces, stress, irritation, disappointment, pain, 
fatigue - that's what does it. It grabs you in the stomach and kills your 
appetite. Once you get used to it, though, it's no problem at all. Plus, 
you can't really take care of a sick person unless you eat properly. It's 
true. I know what I'm talking about because I've done it with my 
grandfather, my grandmother, my mother, and now my father. You 
never know when you're going to have to , so its important to eat 
when you can 

"I see what you mean," I said. 

"Relatives come to visit and they eat with me here, and they always 
leave half their food, just like you. And they always say, "Oh, Midori, 
it's wonderful you've got such a healthy appetite. I'm too upset to eat.' 
But get serious, I'm the one who's actually here taking care of the 
patient! They just have to drop by and show a little sympathy. I'm the 
one who wipes up the shit and collects the phlegm and mops the 
brows. If sympathy was all it took to clean up shit, I'd have 50 times 
as much sympathy as anybody else! Instead, they see me eating all my 
food and they give me this look and say, "Oh Midori, you've got such 
a healthy appetite.' What do they think I am, a donkey pulling a cart? 
They're old enough to know how the world really works, so why are 
they so stupid? It’s easy to talk big, but the important thing is whether 
or not you clean up the shit. I can be hurt, you know. I can get as 
exhausted as anyone else. I can feel so bad I want to cry, too. I mean, 
you try watching a gang of doctors get together and cut open 
somebody's head when there's no hope of saving them, and stirring 
things up in there, and doing it again and again, and every time they 
do it it makes the person worse and a little bit crazier, and see how 
you like it! And on top of it, you see your savings disappear. I don’t 

 



know if I can keep going to university for another three-and-a-half 
years, and there's no way my sister can afford a wedding ceremony at 
this rate." 

"How many days a week do you come here?" I asked. 

"Usually four," said Midori. "This place claims to offer total nursing 
care, and the nurses are great, but there's just too much for them to do. 
Some member of the family has to be around to take up the slack. My 
sister's watching the shop, and I've got my studies. Still, she manages 
to get here three days a week, and I come four. And we sneak in every 
now and then. Believe me, it's a full schedule!" 

"How can you spend time with me if you're so busy?" 

"I like spending time with you," said Midori, playing with a plastic 
cup. 

"Get out of here for a couple of hours and go for a walk," I said. "I'll 
take care of your father for a while." "Why?" 

"You need to get away from the hospital and relax by yourself - not 
talk to anybody, just clear your mind." 

Midori thought about it for a minute and nodded. "Hmm, you may be 
right. But do you know what to do? How to take care of him?" 

"I've been watching. I've pretty much got it. You check the 
intravenous thing, give him water, wipe the sweat off, and help him 
spit phlegm. The bedpan's under the bed, and if he gets hungry I feed 
him the rest of his lunch. Anything I can't work out I'll ask the nurse." 

"I think that should do it," said Midori with a smile. "There's just one 
thing, though. He's starting to get a little funny in the head, so he says 
weird things once in a while - things that nobody can understand. 
Don't let it bother you if 
he does that." 

"I'll be fine," I said. 

Back in the room, Midori told her father she had some business to take 
care of and that I would be watching him while she was out. He 

 



seemed to have nothing to say to this. It might have meant nothing to 
him. He just lay there on his back, staring at the ceiling. If he hadn't 
been blinking every once in a while, he could have passed for dead. 
His eyes were bloodshot as if he had been drinking, and each time he 
took 

a deep breath his nostrils flared a little. Other than that, he didn’t move 
a muscle, and made no effort to reply to Midori. I couldn’t begin to 
grasp what he might be thinking or feeling in the murky depths of his 
consciousness. 

After Midori left, I thought I might try speaking to her father, but I 
had no idea what to say to him or how to say it, so I just kept quiet. 
Before long, he closed his eyes and went to sleep. I sat on the stool by 
the head of the bed and studied the occasional twitching of his nose, 
hoping all the while that he wouldn't die now. How strange it would 
be, I thought, if this man were to breathe his last with me by his side. 
After all, I had just met him for the first time in my life, and the only 
thing binding us together was Midori, a girl I happened to know from 
my History of Drama class. 

He was not dying, though, just sleeping peacefully. Bringing my ear 
close to his face, I could hear his faint breathing. I relaxed and chatted 
to the wife of the man in the next bed. She talked of nothing but 
Midori, assuming I was her boyfriend. 

"She’s a really wonderful girl," she said. "She takes great care of her 
father; she’s kind and gentle and sensitive and solid, and on top of all 
that, she’s pretty. You'd better treat her right. Don’t ever let her go. 
You won’t find another one like her." 

"I’ll treat her right," I said without elaborating. 

"I have a son and daughter at home. He’s 17, she’s 21, and neither of 
them would ever think of coming to the hospital. The minute school 
finishes, they're off surfing or dating or whatever. They're terrible. 
They squeeze me for all the pocket money they can get and then they 
disappear." 

 



At 1.30 she left the hospital to do some shopping. Both men were 
sound asleep. Gentle afternoon sunlight flooded the room, and I felt as 
though I might drift off at any moment perching on my stool. Yellow 
and white chrysanthemums in a vase on the table by the window 
reminded people it was autumn. In the air floated the sweet smell of 
boiled fish left over from lunch. The nurses continued to clip-clop up 
and down the hall, talking to each other in clear, penetrating voices. 
They would peep into the room now and then and flash me a smile 
when they saw that both patients were sleeping. I wished I had 
something to read, but there were no books or magazines or 
newspapers in the room, just a calendar on the wall. 

I thought about Naoko. I thought about her naked, wearing only her 
hairslide. I thought about the curve of her waist and the dark shadow 
of her pubic hair. Why had she shown herself to me like that? Had she 
been sleep-walking? Or was it just a fantasy of mine? As time went by 
and that little world receded into the distance, I grew increasingly 
uncertain whether the events of that night had actually happened. If I 
told myself they were real, I believed they were, and if I told myself 
they were a fantasy, they seemed like a fantasy. They were too clear 
and detailed to have been a fantasy, and too whole and beautiful to 
have been real: Naoko's body and the moonlight. 

Midori's father woke suddenly and started coughing, which put a stop 
to my daydreaming. I helped him spit his phlegm into a tissue, and 
wiped the sweat from his brow with a towel. 

"Would you like some water?" I asked, to which he gave a four- 
millimetre nod. I held the small glass water bottle so that he could sip 
a little bit at a time, dry lips trembling, throat twitching. He drank 
every bit of the lukewarm water in the bottle. 

"Would you like some more?" I asked. He seemed to be trying to 
speak, so I brought my ear closer. 

cThat's enough> he said in a small, dry voice - a voice even smaller 
and dryer than before. 

 



"Why don't you eat something? You must be hungry." He answered 
with a slight nod. As Midori had done, I cranked his bed up and 
started feeding him alternating spoonfuls of vegetable jelly and boiled 
fish. It took an incredibly long time to get through half his food, at 
which point he shook his head a little to signal he had had enough. 
The movement was almost imperceptible; it apparently hurt him to 
make larger gestures. 

"What about the fruit?" I asked him. 

<No> he said. I wiped the corners of his mouth with a towel and made 
the bed level again before taking the dishes to the corridor. 

"Was that good?" I asked him. 

<Awful> he answered. 

"Yeah," I said with a smile. "It looked pretty bad." Midori's father 
could not seem to decide whether to open his eyes further or close 
them as he lay there silently, staring at me. I wondered if he knew who 
I was. He seemed more relaxed when alone with me than when Midori 
was around. He had probably mistaken me for someone else. Or at 
least that was how I preferred to think of it. 

"Beautiful day out there," I said, perching on the stool and crossing 
my legs. "It’s autumn, Sunday, great weather, and crowded 
everywhere you go. Relaxing indoors like this is the best thing you 
can do on such a nice day. It’s exhausting in those crowds. And the air 
is bad. I mostly do laundry on Sundays - wash the stuff in the 
morning, hang it out on the roof of my dorm, take it in before the sun 
goes down, do a good job of ironing it. I don’t mind ironing at all. 
There’s a special satisfaction in making wrinkled things smooth. And 
I’m pretty good at it, too. Of course I was terrible at it at first. I put 
creases in everything. After a month of practice, though, I knew what 
I was doing. So Sunday is my day for laundry and ironing. I couldn't 
do it today, of course. Too bad: wasted a perfect laundry day. 

"That’s OK, though. I’ll wake up early and take care of it tomorrow. 
Don’t worry. I’ve got nothing else to do on a Sunday. 

 



"After I do my laundry tomorrow morning and hang it out to dry. I'll 
go to my ten o'clock class. It's the one I'm in with Midori: History of 
Drama. I'm working on Euripides. Are you familiar with Euripides? 
He was an ancient Greek - one of the "Big Three' of Greek tragedy 
along with Aeschylus and Sophocles. He supposedly died when a dog 
bit him in Macedonia, but not everybody believes this. Anyway, that's 
Euripides. I like Sophocles better, but I suppose it's a matter of taste. I 
really can't say which is better. 

"What marks his plays is the way things get so mixed up the 
characters are trapped. Do you see what I mean? Lots of different 
people appear, and they all have their own situations and reasons and 
excuses, and each one is pursuing his or her own idea of justice or 
happiness. As a result, nobody can do anything. Obviously. I mean, 
it's basically impossible for everybody's justice to prevail or 
everybody's happiness to triumph, so chaos takes over. And then what 
do you think happens? Simple - a god appears at the end and starts 
directing the traffic. "You go over there, and you come here, and you 
get together with her, and you just sit still for while.' Like that. He's a 
kind of fixer, and in the end everything works out perfectly. They call 
this 'deus ex machina'. There's almost always a deus ex machina in 
Euripides, and that's where critical opinion divides over him. 

"But think about it - what if there were a deus ex machina in real life? 
Everything would be so easy! If you felt stuck or trapped, some god 
would swing down from up there and solve all your problems. What 
could be easier than that? Anyway, that's History of Drama. This is 
more or less the kind of stuff we study at university." 

Midori's father said nothing, but he kept his vacant eyes on me the 
whole time I was talking. Of course, I couldn't tell from those eyes 
whether he understood anything I was saying. 

"Peace," I said. 

After all that talk, I felt starved. I had had next to nothing for breakfast 
and had eaten only half my lunch. Now I was sorry I hadn't eaten 

 



more at lunch, but feeling sorry wasn't going to help. I looked in a 
cabinet for something to eat, but found only a can of nori, some Vicks 
cough drops and soy sauce. The paper bag was still there with the 
cucumbers and grapefruit. 

"I'm going to eat some cucumbers if you don’t mind," I said to 
Midori's father. He didn’t answer. I washed three cucumbers in the 
sink and dribbled a little soy sauce into a dish. Then I wrapped a 
cucumber in nori, dipped it in soy sauce and gobbled it down. 

"Mmm, great!" I said to Midori's father. "Fresh, simple, smells like 
life. Really good cucumbers. A far more sensible food than kiwi 
fruit." 

I polished off one cucumber and attacked the next. The sickroom 
echoed with the sound of me munching cucumbers. Only after I had 
finished the second whole cucumber was I ready to take a break. I 
boiled some water on the gas burner in the hall and made tea. 

"Would you like something to drink? Water? Juice?" I asked Midori's 
father. 

<Cucumber> he said. 

"Great," I said with a smile. "With nori?" 

He gave a little nod. I cranked the bed up again. Then I cut a bite- 
sized piece of cucumber, wrapped it with a strip of nori, stabbed the 
combination with a toothpick, dipped it in soy sauce, and delivered it 
to the patient's waiting mouth. With almost no change of expression, 
Midori's father crunched down on the piece again and again and 
finally swallowed it. 

"How was that? Good, huh?" 

<Good> he said. 

"It's good when food tastes good," I said. "It's kind of like proof you're 
alive." 

He ended up eating the entire cucumber. When he had finished it, he 
wanted water, so I gave him a drink from the bottle. A few minutes 
later, he said he needed to pee, so I took the urine jar from under the 

 



bed and held it by the tip of his penis. Afterwards I emptied the jar 
into the toilet and washed it out. Then I went back to the sickroom and 
finished my tea. 

"How are you feeling?" I asked. 

<My.... head> he said. 

"Hurts?" 

<A little> he said with a slight frown. 

"Well, no wonder, you've just had an operation. Of course. I've never 
had one, so I don't know what it's like." <Ticket> he said. 

"Ticket? What ticket?" 

<Midori> he said. <Ticket>. 

I had no idea what he was talking about, and just kept quiet. He stayed 
silent for a time, too. Then he seemed to say <Please>. He opened his 
eyes wide and looked at me hard. I guessed that he was trying to tell 
me something, but I couldn't begin to imagine what it was. 

<Ueno> he said. <Midori>. 

"Ueno Station?" 

He gave a little nod. 

I tried to summarize what he was getting at: "Ticket, Midori, please, 
Ueno Station," but I had no idea what it meant. I assumed his mind 
was muddled, but compared with before his eyes now had a terrible 
clarity. He raised the arm that was free of the intravenous contraption 
and stretched it towards me. This must have been a major effort for 
him, the way the hand trembled in mid-air. I stood and grasped his 
frail, wrinkled hand. He returned my grasp with what little strength he 
could muster and said again <Please>. 

"Don't worry," I said. "I'll take care of the ticket and Midori, too." He 
let his hand drop back to the bed and closed his eyes. Then, with a 
loud rush of breath, he fell asleep. I checked to make sure he was still 
alive, then went out to boil more water for tea. As I was sipping the 
hot liquid, I realized that I had developed a kind of liking for this little 
man on the verge of death. 

 



The wife of the other patient came back a few minutes later and asked 
if everything was OK. I assured her it was. Her husband, too, was 
sound asleep, breathing deeply. 

Midori came back after three. 

"I was in the park, spacing out," she said. "I did what you told me, 
didn't talk to anybody, just let my head go empty." 

"How was it?" 

"Thanks, I feel much better. I still have that draggy, tired feeling, but 
my body feels much lighter than before. I guess I was more tired than 
I realized." 

With her father sound asleep, there was nothing for us to do, so we 
bought coffee from a vending machine and drank it in the TV room. I 
reported to Midori on what had happened in her absence - that her 
father had had a good sleep, then woke up and ate some of what was 
left of his lunch, then saw me eating a cucumber and asked for one 
himself, ate the whole thing and peed. 

"Watanabe, you're amazing," said Midori. "We're all going crazy 
trying to get him to eat anything, and you got him to eat a whole 
cucumber! Incredible!" 

"I don't know, I think he just saw me enjoying my own cucumber." 

"Or maybe you just have this knack for relaxing people." "No way," I 
said with a laugh. "A lot of people will tell you just the opposite about 
me." 

"What do you think about my father?" 

"I like him. Not that we had all that much to say to each 
other. But, I don't know, he seems nice." "Was he quiet?" 

"Very." 

"You should have seen him a week ago. He was awful," Midori said, 
shaking her head. "Kind of lost his marbles and went wild. Threw a 
glass at me and yelled terrible stuff - T hope you die, you stupid bitch!' 
This sickness can do that to people. They don't know why, but it can 

 



make people get really vicious all of a sudden. It was the same with 
my mother. What do you think she said to me? "You're not my 
daughter! I hate your guts!' The whole world turned black for me for a 
second when she said that. But that kind of thing is one of the features 
of this particular sickness. Something presses on a part of the brain 
and makes people say all kinds of nasty things. You know it's just part 
of the sickness, but still, it hurts. What do you expect? Here I am, 
working my fingers to the bone for them, and they're saying all this 
terrible stuff to me-" 

"I know what you mean," I said. Then I remembered the strange 
fragments that Midori's father had mumbled to me. 

"Ticket? Ueno Station?" Midori said. "I wonder what that's all about?" 
"And then he said. Please, and Midori.", "Please take care of 
Midori?"' 

"Or maybe he wants you to go to Ueno and buy a ticket. The order of 
the four words is such a mess, who knows what he means? Does Ueno 
Station mean anything special to you?" 

"Hmm, Ueno Station." Midori thought about it for a while. "The only 
thing I can think of is the two times I ran away, when I was eight and 
when I was ten. Both times I took a train from Ueno to Fukushima. 
Bought the tickets with money I took from the till. Somebody at home 
made me really angry, and I did it to get even. I had an aunt in 
Fukushima, I kind of liked her, so I went to her house. My father was 
the one who brought me home. Came all the way to Fukushima to get 
me - a hundred miles! We ate boxed lunches on the train to Ueno. My 
father told me all kinds of stuff while we were travelling, just little bits 
and pieces with long spaces in between. Like about the big earthquake 
of 1923 or about the war or about the time I was born, stuff he didn't 
usually talk about. Come to think of it, those were the only times my 
father and I had something like a good, long talk, just the two of us. 
Hey, can you believe this? - my father was smack bang in the middle 
of Tokyo during one of the biggest earthquakes in history and he 

 



didn't even notice it!" 

"No way!" 

"It’s true! He was riding through Koishikawa with a cart on the back 
of his bike, and he didn’t feel a thing. When he got home, all the tiles 
had fallen off the roofs in the neighbourhood, and everyone in the 
family was hugging pillars and quaking in their boots. He still didn't 
get it and. the way he tells it, he asked, "What the hell's going on 
here?' That's my father's "fond recollection' of the Great Kanto 
Earthquake!" Midori laughed. "All his stories of the old days are like 
that. No drama whatsoever. They're all just a little bit off-centre. I 
don't know, when he tells those stories, you kind of get the feeling like 
nothing important has happened in Japan for the past 50 or 60 years. 
The young officers' uprising of 1936, the Pacific War, they're all kind 
of "Oh yeah, now that you mention it, I guess something like that once 
happened' kind of things. It's so funny! 

"So, anyway, on the train, he'd tell me these stories in bits and pieces 
while we were riding from Fukushima to Ueno. And at the end, he'd 
always say, "So that goes to show you, Midori, it's the same wherever 
you go.' I was young enough to be impressed by stuff like that." 

"So is that your "fond recollection' of Ueno Station?" I asked. "Yeah," 
said Midori. "Did you ever run away from home, Watanabe?" 

"Never." 

"Why not?" 

"Lack of imagination. It never occurred to me to run away." "You are 
so weird!" Midori said, cocking her head as though truly impressed. 

"I wonder," I said. 

"Well, anyway, I think my father was trying to say he wanted you to 
look after me." 

"Really?" 

"Really! I understand things like that. Intuitively. So tell me, what was 
your answer to him?" 

"Well, I didn't understand what he was saying, so I just said OK. don’t 

 



worry. I'd take care of both you and the ticket." 

"You promised my father that? You said you’d take care of 

me?" She looked me straight in the eye with a dead-serious expression 

on her face. 

"Not like that," I hastened to correct her. "I really didn’t know what he 
was saying, and -" 

"Don't worry, I'm just kidding." she said with a smile. "I love that 
about you." 

Midori and I finished our coffee and went back to the room. Her father 
was still sound asleep. If you leaned close you could hear his steady 
breathing. As the afternoon deepened, the light outside the hospital 
window changed to the soft, gentle colour of autumn. A flock of birds 
rested on the electric wire outside, then flew on. Midori and I sat in a 
corner of the room, talking quietly the whole time. She read my palm 
and predicted that I would live to 105, marry three times, and die in a 
traffic accident. "Not a bad life," I said. 

When her father woke just after four o'clock, Midori went to sit by his 
pillow, wiped the sweat from his brow, gave him water, and asked 
him about the pain in his head. A nurse came and took his 
temperature, recorded the number of his urinations, and checked the 
intravenous equipment. I went to the TV room and watched a little 
football. 

At five I told Midori I would be leaving. To her father I explained, "I 
have to go to work now. I sell records in Shinjuku from six to 10.30." 
He turned his eyes to me and gave a little nod. 

"Hey, Watanabe, I don't know how to put this, but I really want to 
thank you for today," Midori said to me when she saw me to 
reception. 

"I didn’t do that much," I said. "But if I can be of any help. I'll come 
next week, too. I'd like to see your father again." 

"Really?" 

"Well, there's not that much for me to do in the dorm, and if I come 

 



here I get to eat cucumbers." 

Midori folded her arms and tapped the linoleum with the heel of her 
shoe. 

"I'd like to go drinking with you again," she said, cocking her head 
slightly. 

"How about the porno movies?" 

"We'll do that first and then go drinking. And we'll talk about all the 
usual disgusting things." 

"I'm not the one who talks about disgusting things," I protested. "It's 
you." 

"Anyway, we'll talk about things like that and get plastered and go to 
bed." 

"And you know what happens next," I said with a sigh. "I try to do it, 
and you don’t let me. Right?" She laughed through her nose. 

"Anyway," I said, "pick me up again next Sunday morning. We'll 
come here together." 

"With me in a little longer skirt?" 

"Definitely," I said. 

I didn't go to the hospital that next Sunday, though. Midori's father 
died on Friday morning. 

She called at 6.30 in the morning to tell me that. The buzzer letting me 
know I had a phone call went off and I ran down to the lobby with a 
cardigan thrown over my pyjamas. A cold rain was falling silently. 

"My father died a few minutes ago," Midori said in a small, quiet 
voice. I asked her if there was anything I could do. "Thanks," she said. 
"There's really nothing. We're used to funerals. I just wanted to let you 
know." 

A kind of sigh escaped her lips. 

"Don't come to the funeral, OK? I hate stuff like that. I don't want to 
see you there." 

"I get it," I said. 

 



"Will you really take me to a pomo movie?" "Of course I will." 

"A really disgusting one." 

"I'll research the matter thoroughly." "Good. I'll call you," she said and 
hung up. 

A week went by without a word from Midori. No calls, no sign of her 
in the lecture hall. I kept hoping for a message from her whenever I 
went back to the dorm, but there were never any. One night, I tried to 
keep my promise by thinking of her when I masturbated, but it didn’t 
work. I tried switching over to Naoko, but not even Naoko's image 
was any help that time. It seemed so ridiculous I gave up. I took a 
swig of whisky, brushed my teeth and went to bed. 

I wrote a letter to Naoko on Sunday morning. One thing I told her 
about was Midori's father. I went to the hospital to visit the father of a 
girl in one of my lectures and ate some cucumbers in his room. When 
he heard me crunching on them, he wanted some too, and he ate his 
with the same crunching sound. Five days later, though, he died. I still 
have a vivid memory of the tiny crunching he made when he chewed 
his pieces of cucumber. People leave strange, little memories of 
themselves behind when they die. My letter went on: 

I think of you and Reiko and the aviary while I lie in bed after waking 
up in the morning. I think about the peacock and pigeons and parrots 
and turkeys - and about the rabbits. I remember the yellow raincapes 
you and Reiko wore with the hoods up that rainy morning. It feels 
good to think about you when I’m warm in bed. I feel as if you're 
curled up there beside me, fast asleep. And I think how great it would 
be if it were true. 

I miss you terribly sometimes, but in general I go on living with all the 
energy I can muster. Just as you take care of the birds and the fields 
every morning, every morning I wind my own spring. I give it some 

 


 good twists by the time I've got up, brushed my teeth, shaved, eaten 
breakfast, changed my clothes, left the dorm, and arrived at the 
university. I tell myself, "OK. let's make this day another good one." I 
hadn't noticed before, but they tell me I talk to myself a lot these days. 
Probably mumbling to myself while I wind my spring. 

It's hard not being able to see you, but my life in Tokyo would be a lot 
worse if it weren't for you. It's because I think of you when I'm in bed 
in the morning that I can wind my spring and tell myself I have to live 
another good day. I know I have to give it my best here just as you are 
doing there. 

Today's Sunday, though, a day I don't wind my spring. I've done my 
laundry, and now I'm in my room, writing to you. Once I've finished 
this letter and put a stamp on it and dropped it into the postbox, there's 
nothing for me to do until the sun goes down. I don’t study on 
Sundays, either. I do a good enough job on weekdays studying in the 
library between lectures, so I don’t have anything left to do on 
Sundays. Sunday afternoons are quiet, peaceful and. for me, lonely. I 
read books or listen to music. Sometimes I think back on the different 
routes we used to take in our Sunday walks around Tokyo. I can come 
up with a pretty clear picture of the clothes you were wearing on any 
particular walk. I remember all kinds of things on Sunday afternoons. 
Say "Hi" from me to Reiko. I really miss her guitar at night. 

When I had finished the letter, I walked a couple of blocks to a 
postbox, then bought an egg sandwich and a Coke at a nearby bakery. 
I had these for lunch while I sat on a bench and watched some boys 
playing baseball in a local playground. The deepening of autumn had 
brought an increased blueness and depth to the sky. I glanced up to 
find two vapour trails heading off to the west in perfect parallel like 
tram tracks. A foul ball came rolling my way, and when I threw it 
back to them the young players doffed their caps with a polite "Thank 
you, sir". As in most junior baseball, there were lots of walks and 

 



stolen bases. 

After noon I went back to my room to read but couldn’t concentrate. 
Instead I found myself staring at the ceiling and thinking about 
Midori. I wondered if her father had really been trying to ask me to 
look after her when he was gone, but I had no way of telling what had 
been on his mind. He had probably confused me with somebody else. 
In any case, he had died on a Friday morning when a cold rain was 
falling, and now it was impossible to know the truth. I imagined that, 
in death, he had shrivelled up smaller than ever. And then they had 
burned him in an oven until he was nothing but ashes. And what had 
he left behind? A nothing-much bookshop in a nothing-much 
neighbourhood and two daughters, at least one of whom was more 
than a little strange. What kind of life was that? I wondered. Lying in 
that hospital bed with his cut-open head and his muddled brain, what 
had been on his mind as he looked at me? 

Thinking thoughts like this about Midori's father put me into such a 
miserable mood that I had to bring the laundry down from the roof 
before it was really diy and set off for Shinjuku to kill time walking 
the streets. The Sunday crowds gave me some relief. The Kinokuniya 
bookshop was as jampacked as a rush-hour train. I bought a copy of 
Faulkner's Light in August and went to the noisiest jazz cafe I could 
think of, reading my new book while listening to Ornette Coleman and 
Bud Powell and drinking hot, thick, foul-tasting coffee. At 5.30 I 
closed my book, went outside and ate a light supper. How many 
Sundays - how many hundreds of Sundays like this - lay ahead of me? 
"Quiet, peaceful, and lonely," I said aloud to myself. On Sundays, I 
didn't wind my spring. 

 




Halfway through that week I managed to cut my palm open on a piece 
of broken glass. I hadn't noticed that one of the glass partitions in a 
record shelf was cracked. I could hardly believe how much blood 
gushed out of me, turning the floor bright red at my feet. The shop 
manager found some towels and tied them tightly around the wound. 
Then he made a phone call to casualty. He was a pretty useless guy 
most of the time, but he acted with surprising efficiency. The hospital 
was nearby, fortunately, but by the time I got there the towels were 
soaked in red, and the blood they couldn't soak up had been dripping 
on the tarmac. People scurried out of the way for me. They seemed to 
think I had been injured in a fight. I felt no pain to speak of, but the 
blood wouldn't stop. 

The doctor was cool as he removed the blood-soaked towels, stopped 
the bleeding with a tourniquet on my wrist, disinfected the wound and 
sewed it up, telling me to come again the next day. Back at the record 
shop, the manager told me to go home: he would put me down as 
having worked my shift. I took a bus to the dorm and went straight to 
Nagasawa's room. With my nerves on edge over the cut, I wanted to 
talk to somebody, and I hadn't seen Nagasawa for a long time. 

I found him in his room, drinking a can of beer and watching a 
Spanish lesson on TV. "What the hell happened to you?" he asked 
when he saw my bandage. I said I had cut myself but that it was 
nothing much. He offered me a beer and I said no thanks. 

"Just wait. This'll be over in a minute," said Nagasawa, and he went 
on practising his Spanish pronunciation. I boiled some water and 

 



made myself a cup of tea with a tea bag. A Spanish woman recited 
example sentences: "I have never seen such terrible rain!", "Many 
bridges were washed away in Barcelona." Nagasawa read the text 
aloud in Spanish. "What awful sentences!" he said. "This kind of shit 
is all they ever give you." 

When the programme ended, he turned off the TV and took another 
beer from his small refrigerator. 

"Are you sure I'm not in the way?" I asked. 

"No way. I was bored out of my mind. Sure you don’t want a beer?" 
"No, I really don't," I said. 

"Oh, yeah, they posted the exam results the other day. I passed!" 

"The Foreign Ministry exam?" 

"That's it. Officially, it's called the "Foreign Affairs Public Service 
Personnel First Class Service Examination'. What a joke!" 
"Congratulations!" I said and gave him my left hand to shake. 

"Thanks." 

"Of course. I'm not surprised you passed." 

"No, neither am I," laughed Nagasawa. "But it's nice to have it 
official." 

"Think you'll go abroad once you get in ?" 

"Nah, first they give you a year of training. Then they send you 
overseas for a while." 

I sipped my tea, and he drank his beer with obvious satisfaction. 

"I'll give you this fridge if you'd like it when I get out of here," said 
Nagasawa. "You’d like to have it, wouldn't you? It’s great for beer." 
"Yeah, I’d like to have it, but won’t you need it? You'll be living in a 
flat or something." 

"Don't be stupid! When I get out of this place, I'm buying myself a big 
fridge. I'm gonna live the high life! Four years in a shithole like this is 
long enough. I don’t want to have to look at anything I used in this 
place. You name it. I'll give it to you - the TV, the thermos flask, the 
radio. .." 

 



"I'll take anything you want to give me," I said. I picked up the 
Spanish textbook on his desk and stared at it. "You're starting 
Spanish?" 

"Yeah. The more languages you know the better. And I've got a knack 
for them. I taught myself French and it's practically perfect. 
Languages are like games. You learn the rules for one, and they all 
work the same way. Like women." 

"Ah, the reflective life!" I said with a sarcastic edge. 

"Anyway, let's eat out soon." 

"You mean cruising for women?" 

"No, a real dinner. You, me and Hatsumi at a good restaurant. To 
celebrate my new job. My old man's paying, so we'll go somewhere 
really expensive." 

"Shouldn't it just be you and Hatsumi?" 

"No, it’d be better with you there. I'd be more comfortable, and so 
would Hatsumi." 

Oh no, it was Kizuki, Naoko and me all over again. 

"I'll spend the night at Hatsumi's afterwards, so join us just for the 
meal." 

"OK. if you both really want me to," I said. "But, anyway, what are 
you planning to do about Hatsumi? You'll be assigned overseas when 
you finish your training, and you probably won't come back for years. 
What's going to happen to her?" 

"That's her problem." 

"I don’t get it," I said. 

Feet on his desk, Nagasawa took a swig of beer and yawned. 

"Look, I’m not planning to get married. I’ve made that perfectly clear 
to Hatsumi. If she wants to marry someone, she should go ahead and 
do it. I won’t stop her. If she wants to wait for me, let her wait. That’s 
what I mean." 

"I have to hand it to you," I said. 

"You think I’m a shit, don’t you?" 

 



"Ido." 

"Look, the world is an inherently unfair place. I didn’t write the rules. 
It's always been that way. I have never once deceived Hatsumi. She 
knows I'm a shit and that she can leave me whenever she decides she 
can't take it. I told her that straight from the start." 

Nagasawa finished his beer and lit a cigarette. 

"Isn't there anything about life that frightens you?" I asked. 

"Hey, I'm not a total idiot," said Nagasawa. "Of course life frightens 
me sometimes. I don't happen to take that as the premise for 
everything else, though. I'm going to give it 100 per cent and go as far 
as I can. I'll take what I want and leave what I don't want. That's how I 
intend to live my life, and if things go bad. I'll stop and reconsider at 
that point. If you think about it, an unfair society is a society that 
makes it possible for you to exploit your abilities to the limit." 

"Sounds like a pretty self-centred way to live," I said. "Perhaps, but 
I'm not just looking up at the sky and waiting for the fruit to drop. In 
my own way. I'm working hard. I'm working ten times harder than 
you are." 

"That's probably true," I said. 

"I look around me sometimes and I get sick to my stomach. Why the 
hell don't these bastards do something? I wonder. They don't do a 
fucking thing, and then they moan about it." 

Amazed at the harshness of his tone, I looked at Nagasawa. "The way 
I see it, people are working hard. They're working their fingers to the 
bone. Or am I looking at things wrong?" 

"That's not hard work. It's just manual labour," Nagasawa said with 
finality. "The "hard work' I'm talking about is more self-directed and 
purposeful." 

"You mean, like studying Spanish while everyone else is taking it 
easy?" 

"That's it. I'm going to have Spanish mastered by next spring. I've got 
English and German and French down pat, and I'm almost there with 

 



Italian. You think things like that happen without hard work?" 
Nagasawa puffed on his cigarette while I thought about Midori's 
father. There was one man who had probably never even thought 
about starting Spanish lessons on TV He had probably never thought 
about the difference between hard work and manual labour, either. He 
was probably too busy to think about such things - busy with work, 
and busy bringing home a daughter who had run away to Fukushima. 
"So, about that dinner of ours," said Nagasawa. "Would this Saturday 
be OK for you?" 

"Fine," I said. 

Nagasawa picked a fancy French restaurant in a quiet backstreet of 
Azabu. He gave his name at the door and the two of us were shown to 
a secluded private room. Some 15 prints hung on the walls of the 
small chamber. While we waited for Hatsumi to arrive, Nagasawa and 
I sipped a delicious wine and chatted about the novels of Joseph 
Conrad. He wore an expensive-looking grey suit. I had on an ordinary 
blue blazer. 

Hatsumi arrived 15 minutes later. She was carefully made up and 
wore gold earrings, a beautiful deep blue dress, and tasteful red court 
shoes. When I complimented her on the colour of her dress, she told 
me it was called midnight blue. 

"What an elegant restaurant!" she said. 

"My old man always eats here when he comes to Tokyo," said 
Nagasawa. "I came here with him once. I'm not crazy about these 
snooty places." 

"It doesn't hurt to eat in a place like this once in a while," said 
Hatsumi. Turning to me, she asked, "Don't you agree?" "I guess so. As 
long as I'm not paying." 

"My old man usually brings his mistress here," said Nagasawa. "He's 
got one in Tokyo, you know." "Really?" asked Hatsumi. I took a sip of 
wine, as if I had heard nothing. 

 



Eventually a waiter came and took our orders. After choosing hors 
d'oeuvres and soup, Nagasawa ordered duck, and Hatsumi and I 
ordered sea bass. The food arrived at a leisurely pace, which allowed 
us to enjoy the wine and conversation. Nagasawa spoke first of the 
Foreign Ministry exam. Most of the examinees were scum who might 
just as well be thrown into a bottomless pit, he said, though he 
supposed there were a few decent ones in the bunch. I asked if he 
thought the ratio of good ones to scum was higher or lower than in 
society at large. 

"It's the same," he said. "Of course." It was the same everywhere, he 
added: an immutable law. 

Nagasawa ordered a second bottle of wine and a double Scotch for 
himself. 

Hatsumi then began talking about a girl she wanted to fix me up with. 
This was a perpetual topic between us. She was always telling me 
about some "cute girl in my club", and I was always running away. 
"She's really nice, though, and really cute. I'll bring her along next 
time. You ought to talk to her. I'm sure you'll like her." 

"It's a waste of time, Hatsumi," I said. "I'm too poor to go out with 
girls from your university. I can't talk to them." 

"Don't be silly," she said. "This girl is simple and natural and 
unaffected." 

"Come on, Watanabe," said Nagasawa. "Just meet her. You don’t have 
to screw her." 

"I should say not!" said Hatsumi. "She's a virgin." 

"Like you used to be," said Nagasawa. 

"Exactly," said Hatsumi with a bright smile. "Like I used to be. But 
really," she said to me, "don't give me that stuff about being "too 
poor'. It's got nothing to do with it. Sure, there are a few super-stuck- 
up girls in every year, but the rest of us are just ordinary. We all eat 
lunch in the school cafeteria for ? 250 -" 

"Now wait just a minute, Hatsumi," I said, interrupting her. "In my 

 



school the cafeteria has three lunches: A, B, and C. The A Lunch is 
? 120, the B Lunch is ? 100, and the C Lunch is ? 80. Everybody gives 
me dirty looks when I eat the A Lunch, and anyone who can't afford 
the C Lunch eats ramen noodles for ? 60. That's the kind of place I go 
to. You still think I can talk to girls from yours?" 

Hatsumi could barely stop laughing. "That's so cheap!" she said. 
"Maybe I should go there for lunch! But really. Torn, you're such a 
nice guy. I'm sure you’d get along with this girl. She might even like 
the ? 120 lunch." 

"No way," I said with a laugh. "Nobody eats that stuff because they 
like it; they eat it because they can't afford anything else." 

"Anyway, don't judge a book by its cover. It's true we go to this hoity- 
toity establishment, but lots of us there are serious people who think 
serious thoughts about life. Not everybody is looking for a boyfriend 
with a sports car." 

"I know that much," I said. 

"Watanabe's got a girl. He's in love," said Nagasawa. "But he won’t 
say a word about her. He's as tight-lipped as they come. A riddle 
wrapped in an enigma." 

"Really?" Hatsumi asked me. 

"Really," I said. "But there's no riddle involved here. It's just that it's 
complicated, and hard to talk about." 

"An illicit love? Ooh! You can talk to me!" I took a sip of wine to 
avoid answering. 

"See what I mean?" said Nagasawa, at work on his third whisky. 
"Tight-lipped. When this guy decides he's not going to talk about 
something, nobody can drag it out of him." "What a shame," said 
Hatsumi as she cut a small slice of terrine and brought it to her lips. 
"If you'd got on with her, we could have double-dated." 

"Yeah, we could’ve got drunk and done a little swapping," said 
Nagasawa. 

"Enough of that kind of talk," said Hatsumi. 

 



"What do you mean "that kind of talk'? Watanabe's got his eye on 
you," said Nagasawa. 

"That has nothing to do with what I'm talking about," Hatsumi 
murmured. "He's not that kind of person. He's sincere and caring. I can 
tell. That's why I've been trying to fix him up." 

"Oh, sure, he's sincere. Like the time we swapped women once, way 
back when. Remember, Watanabe?" Nagasawa said this with a blase 
look on his face, then slugged back the rest of his whisky and ordered 
another. 

Hatsumi set her knife and fork down and dabbed at her mouth with 
her napkin. Then, looking at me, she asked, "Tom, did you really do 
that?" 

I didn't know how to answer her, and so I said nothing. 

"Tell her," said Nagasawa. "What the hell." The mood was turning 
sour. Nagasawa could get nasty when he was drunk, but tonight his 
nastiness was aimed at Hatsumi, not at me. Knowing that made it all 
the more difficult for me to go on sitting there. 

"I’d like to hear about that," said Hatsumi. "It sounds very interesting!" 
"We were drunk," I said. 

"That’s all right. Torn. I’m not blaming you. I just want you to tell me 
what happened." 

"The two of us were drinking in a bar in Shibuya, and we got friendly 
with this pair of girls. They went to some college, and they were 
pretty plastered, too. So, anyway, we, uh, went to a hotel and slept 
with them. Our rooms were right next door to each other, hi the 
middle of the night, Nagasawa knocked on my door and said we 
should change girls, so I went to his room and he came to mine." 

"Didn't the girls mind?" 

"No, they were drunk too." 

"Anyway, I had a good reason for doing it," said Nagasawa. 

"A good reason?" 

"Well, the girls were too different. One was really goodlooking, but 

 



the other one was a dog. It seemed unfair to me. I got the pretty girl, 
but Watanabe got stuck with the other one. That's why we swapped. 
Right, Watanabe?" 

"Yeah, I s'pose so," I said. But in fact, I had liked the not-pretty one. 
She was fun to talk to and a nice person. After we had sex, we were 
enjoying talking to each other in bed when Nagasawa showed up and 
suggested we change partners. I asked the girl if she minded, and she 
said it was OK with her if that's what we wanted. She probably 
thought I wanted to do it with the pretty one. 

"Was it fun?" Hatsumi asked me. 

"Swapping, you mean?" 

"The whole thing." 

"Not especially. It's just something you do. Sleeping with girls that 
way is not all that much fun." 

"So why do you do it?" 

"Because of me," said Nagasawa. 

"I'm asking Toru," Hatsumi shot back at Nagasawa. "Why do you do 
something like that?" 

"Because sometimes I have this tremendous desire to sleep with a 
girl." 

"If you're in love with someone, can't you manage one way or another 
with her?" Hatsumi asked after a few moments' thought. 

"It's complicated." 

Hatsumi sighed. 

At that point the door opened and the food was carried in. Nagasawa 
was presented with his roast duck, and Hatsumi and I received our sea 
bass. The waiters heaped freshcooked vegetables on our plates and 
dribbled sauce on them before withdrawing and leaving the three of us 
alone again. Nagasawa cut a slice of duck and ate it with gusto, 
followed by more whisky. I took a forkful of spinach. Hatsumi didn’t 
touch her food. 

 



"You know, Tom," she said. "I have no idea what makes your 
situation so "complicated', but I do think that the kind of thing you just 
told me about is not right for you. You're not that kind of person. 
What do you think?" She placed her hands on the table and looked me 
in the eye. 

"Well," I said, "I've felt that way myself sometimes." 

"So why don't you stop?" 

"Because sometimes I have a need for human warmth," I answered 
honestly. "Sometimes, if I can't feel something like the warmth of a 
woman's skin, I get so lonely I can't stand it." 

"Here, let me summarize what I think it's all about," interjected 
Nagasawa. "Watanabe's got this girl he likes, but for certain 
complicated reasons, they can't do it. So he tells himself "Sex is just 
sex', and he takes care of his need with somebody else. What's wrong 
with that? It makes perfect sense. He can't just stay locked in his room 
tossing off all the time, can he?" 

"But if you really love her, Tom, shouldn’t it be possible for you to 
control yourself ?" 

"Maybe so," I said, bringing a piece of sea bass in cream sauce to my 
mouth. 

"You just don't understand a man's sexual needs," said Nagasawa to 
Hatsumi. "Look at me, for example. I've been with you for three years, 
and I've slept with plenty of women in that time. But I don't remember 
a thing about them. I don't know their names, I don't remember their 
faces. I slept with each of them exactly once. Meet 'em, do it, so long. 
That's it. What's wrong with that?" 

"What I can't stand is that arrogance of yours," said Hatsumi in a soft 
voice. "Whether you sleep with other women or not is beside the 
point. I've never really been angry with you for sleeping around, have 
I?" 

"You can't even call what I do sleeping around. It's just a game. 

 



Nobody gets hurt," said Nagasawa. 

"I get hurt," said Hatsumi. "Why am I not enough for you?" 

Nagasawa kept silent for a moment and swirled the whisky in his 
glass. "It's not that you're not enough for me. That's another phase, 
another question. It's just a hunger I have inside me. If I've hurt you. 
I'm sorry. But it's not a question of whether or not you're enough for 
me. I can only live with that hunger. That's the kind of man I am. 
That's what makes me me. There's nothing I can do about it, don't you 
see?" 

At last Hatsumi picked up her silverware and started eating her fish. 
"At least you shouldn’t drag Torn into your "games'." 

"We're a lot alike, though, Watanabe and me," said Nagasawa. 
"Neither of us is interested, essentially, in anything but ourselves. OK. 
so I'm arrogant and he's not, but neither of us is able to feel any 
interest in anything other than what we ourselves think or feel or do. 
That's why we can think about things in a way that's totally divorced 
from anybody else. That's what I like about him. The only difference 
is that he hasn't realized this about himself, and so he hesitates and 
feels hurt." 

"What human being doesn't hesitate and feel hurt?" Hatsumi 
demanded. "Are you trying to say that you have never felt those 
things?" 

"Of course I have, but I've disciplined myself to where I can minimize 
them. Even a rat will choose the least painful route if you shock him 
enough." 

"But rats don't fall in love." 

""Rats don't fall in love'." Nagasawa looked at me. "That's great. We 
should have background music for this - a full orchestra with two 
harps and -" 

"Don't make fun of me. I'm serious." 

-We're eating," said Nagasawa. "And Watanabe's here. It .night be 
more civil for us to confine 'serious' talk to another occasion." 

 



"I can leave," I said. 

"No," said Hatsumi. "Please stay. It's better with you here." 

"At least have dessert," said Nagasawa. 

"I don’t mind, really." 

The three of us went on eating in silence for a time. I finished my fish. 
Hatsumi left half of hers. Nagasawa had polished off his duck long 
before and was now concentrating on his whisky. 

"That was excellent sea bass," I offered, but no one took me up on it. I 
might as well have thrown a rock down a deep well. 

The waiters took away our plates and brought lemon sherbet and 
espresso. Nagasawa barely touched his dessert and coffee, moving 
directly to a cigarette. Hatsumi ignored her sherbet. "Oh boy," I 
thought to myself as I finished my sherbet and coffee. Hatsumi stared 
at her hands on the table. Like everything she wore, her hands looked 
chic and elegant and expensive. I thought about Naoko and Reiko. 
What would they be doing now? I wondered. Naoko could be lying on 
the sofa reading a book, and Reiko might be playing "Norwegian 
Wood" on her guitar. I felt an intense desire to go back to that little 
room of theirs. What the hell was I doing in this place? 

"Where Watanabe and I are alike is, we don't give a shit if nobody 
understands us," Nagasawa said. "That's what makes us different from 
everybody else. They're all worried about whether the people around 
them understand them. But not me, and not Watanabe. We just don't 
give a shit. Self and others are separate." 

"Is this true?" Hatsumi asked me. 

"No," I said. "I'm not that strong. I don't feel it's OK if nobody 
understands me. I've got people I want to understand and be 
understood by. But aside from those few, well, I feel it's kind of 
hopeless. I don't agree with Nagasawa. I do care if people understand 
me." 

"That's practically the same thing as what I'm saying," said Nagasawa, 
picking up his coffee spoon. "It is the same! It's the difference 

 



between a late breakfast or an early lunch. Same time, same food, 
different name." 

Now Hatsumi spoke to Nagasawa. "Don't you care whether I 
understand you or not?" 

"You don’t get it, do you? Person A understands Person B because the 
time is right for that to happen, not because Person B wants to be 
understood by Person A." 

"So is it a mistake for me to feel that I want to be understood by 
someone - by you, for example?" 

"No, it’s not a mistake," answered Nagasawa. "Most people would call 
that love, if you think you want to understand me. My system for 
living is way different from other people's systems for living." 

"So what you're saying is you're not in love with me, is that it?" 

"Well, my system and your -" 

"To hell with your fucking system!" Hatsumi shouted. That 
was the first and last time I ever heard her shout. 

Nagasawa pushed the button by the table, and the waiter 

came in with the bill. Nagasawa handed him a credit card. "Sony 

about this, Watanabe," said Nagasawa. "I'm going 

to see Hatsumi home. You go back to the donn alone, OK?" "You 

don't have to apologize to me. Great meal," I said, but 

no one said anything in response. 

The waiter brought the card, and Nagasawa signed with a ballpoint 
pen after checking the amount. Then the three of us stood and went 
outside. Nagasawa started to step into the street to hail a taxi, but 
Hatsumi stopped him. 

"Thanks, but I don't want to spend any more time with you today. You 
don’t have to see me home. Thank you for dinner." 

..Whatever," said Nagasawa. 

"I want Tom to see me home." 

"Whatever," said Nagasawa. "But Watanabe's practically the same as 
me. He may be a nice guy, but deep down in his heart he's incapable 

 



of loving anybody. There's always some part of him somewhere that's 
wide awake and detached. He just has that hunger that won't go away. 
Believe me, I know what I'm talking about." 

I flagged down a taxi and let Hatsumi in first. "Anyway," I said to 
Nagasawa, "I'll make sure she gets home." 

"Sorry to put you through this," said Nagasawa, but I could see that he 
was already thinking about something else. 

Once inside the cab, I asked Hatsumi, "Where do you want to go? 
Back to Ebisu?" Her flat was in Ebisu. 

She shook her head. 

"OK. How about a drink somewhere?" 

"Yes," she said with a nod. 

"Shibuya," I told the driver. 

Folding her arms and closing her eyes, Hatsumi sank back into the 
comer of the seat. Her small gold earrings caught the light as the taxi 
swayed. Her midnight-blue dress seemed to have been made to match 
the darkness of the interior. Every now and then her lightly made-up, 
beautifully formed lips would quiver slightly as though she had caught 
herself on the verge of talking to herself. Watching her, I could see 
why Nagasawa had chosen her as his special companion. There were 
any number of women more beautiful than Hatsumi, and Nagasawa 
could have made any of them his. But Hatsumi had some quality that 
could send a tremor through your heart. It was nothing forceful. The 
power she exerted was a subtle thing, but it called forth deep 
resonances. I watched her all the way to Shibuya, and wondered, 
without ever finding an answer, what this emotional reverberation 
could be that I was feeling. 

It finally hit me some dozen or so years later. I had gone to Santa Fe 
to interview a painter and was sitting in a local pizza parlour, drinking 
beer and eating pizza and watching a miraculously beautiful sunset. 
Everything was soaked in brilliant red - my hand, the plate, the table. 

 



the world - as if some special kind of fruit juice had splashed down on 
everything. In the midst of this overwhelming sunset, the image of 
Hatsumi flashed into my mind, and in that moment I understood what 
that tremor of the heart had been. It was a kind of childhood longing 
that had always remained - and would for ever remain - unfulfilled. I 
had forgotten the existence of such innocent, almost burnt-in longing: 
forgotten for years that such feelings had ever existed inside me. What 
Hatsumi had stirred in me was a part of my very self that had long lain 
dormant. And when the realization struck me, it aroused such sorrow I 
almost burst into tears. She had been an absolutely special woman. 
Someone should have done something - anything - to save her. 

But neither Nagasawa nor I could have managed that. As so many of 
those I knew had done, Hatsumi reached a certain stage in life and 
decided - almost on the spur of the moment - to end it. Two years after 
Nagasawa left for Germany, she married, and two years after that she 
slashed her wrists with a razor blade. 

It was Nagasawa, of course, who told me what had 
happened. His letter from Bonn said this: "Hatsumi's death has 
extinguished something. This is unbearably sad and painful, even to 
me." I ripped his letter to shreds and threw it away. I never wrote to 
him again. 

Hatsumi and I went to a small bar and downed several drinks. Neither 
of us said much. Like a bored, old married couple, we sat opposite 
each other, drinking in silence and munching peanuts. When the place 
began to fill up, we went for a walk. Hatsumi said she would pay the 
bill, but I insisted on paying because the drinks had been my idea. 

There was a deep chill in the night air. Hatsumi wrapped herself in her 
pale grey cardigan and walked by my side in silence. I had no 
destination in mind as we ambled through the nighttime streets, my 
hands shoved deep into my pockets. This was just like walking with 
Naoko, it occurred to me. 

 



"Do you know somewhere we could play pool around here?" Hatsumi 
asked me without warning. 

"Pool? You play?" 

"Yeah, I'm pretty good. How about you?" 

"I play a little. Not that I'm very good at it." 

"OK. then. Let's go." 

We found a pool hall nearby and went in. It was a small place at the 
far end of an alley. The two of us - Hatsumi in her chic dress and I in 
my blue blazer and regimental tie - clashed with the scruffy pool hall, 
but this didn't seem to concern Hatsumi at all as she chose and chalked 
her cue. She pulled a hairslide from her bag and clipped her hair aside 
at one temple to keep it from interfering with her game. 

We played two games. Hatsumi was as good as she had claimed to be, 
while my own game was hampered by the thick bandage I still wore 
on my cut hand. She crashed me. 

"You’re great," I said in admiration. 

"You mean appearances can be deceiving?" she asked as she sized up 
a shot, smiling. 

"Where did you learn to play like that?" 

"My grandfather - my father's father - was an old playboy. He had a 
table in his house. I used to play pool with my brother just for fun, and 
when I got a little bigger my grandfather taught me the right moves. 
He was a wonderful guy - stylish, handsome. He's dead now, though. 
He always used to boast how he once met Deanna Durbin in New 
York." 

She got three in a row, then missed on the fourth try. I managed to 
squeeze out a point, then missed an easy shot. 

"It's the bandage," said Hatsumi to comfort me. 

"No, it's because I haven't played for so long," I said. "Two years and 
five months." 

"How can you be so sure of the time?" 

 



"My friend died the night after our last game together," I said. 

"So you stopped playing?" 

"No, not really," I said after giving it some thought. "I just never had 
the opportunity to play after that. That's all." "How did your friend 
die?" 

"Traffic accident." 

She made several more shots, aiming with deadly seriousness and 
adjusting the strength of each shot with precision. Watching her in 
action - her carefully set hair swept back out of her eyes, golden 
earrings sparkling, court shoes set firmly on the floor, lovely, slender 
fingers pressing the green baize as she took her shot - I felt as if her 
side of the scruffy pool hall had been transformed into part of some 
elegant social event. I had never spent time with her alone before, and 
this was a marvellous experience for me, as though I had been drawn 
up to a higher plane of life. At the end of the third game - in which, of 
course, she crushed me again -my cut began to throb, and so we 
stopped playing. 

"I'm sorry," she said with what seemed like genuine concern. "I should 
never have suggested this." 

"That's OK," I said. "It's not a bad cut, I enjoyed playing. Really." 

As we were leaving the pool hall, the skinny woman owner said to 
Hatsumi, "You've a good eye, sister." Hatsumi gave her a sweet smile 
and thanked her as she paid the bill. 

"Does it hurt?" she asked when we were outside. 

"Not much," I said. 

"Do you think it opened?" 

"No, it’s probably OK." 

"I know! You should come to my place. I'll change your bandage for 
you. I've got disinfectant and everything. Come on. I'm right over 
there." 

I told her it wasn't worth worrying about, that I’d be OK. but she 
insisted we had to check to see if the cut had opened or not. 

 



"Or is it that you don't like being with me? You want to go back to 
your room as soon as possible, is that it?" she said with a playful 
smile. 

"No way," I said. 

"All right, then. Don’t stand on ceremony. It's a short walk." 

Hatsumi's flat was a 15-minute walk from Shibuya towards Ebisu. By 
no means a glamorous building, it was more than decent, with a nice 
little lobby and a lift. Hatsumi sat me at the kitchen table and went to 
the bedroom to change. She came out wearing a Princeton hooded 
sweatshirt and cotton trousers - and no more gold earrings. Setting a 
first-aid box on the table, she undid my bandage, checked to see that 
the wound was still sealed, put a little disinfectant on the area and tied 
a new bandage over the cut. She did all this like an expert. "How come 
you're so good at so many things?" I asked. 

"I used to do volunteer work at a hospital. Kind of like playing nurse. 
That's how I learned." 

When Hatsumi had finished with the bandage, she went and fetched 
two cans of beer from the fridge. She drank half of hers, and I drank 
mine plus the half she left. Then she showed me pictures of the other 
girls in her club. She was right: some of them were cute. 

"Any time you decide you want a girlfriend, come to me," she said. 
"I'll fix you up straight away." 

"Yes, Miss." 

'All right, Tom, tell me the truth. You think I'm an old matchmaker, 
don’t you?" 

"To some extent," I said, telling her the truth, but with a smile. 
Hatsumi smiled, too. She looked good when she smiled. 

"Tell me something else, Tom," she said. "What do you think about 
Nagasawa and me?" 

"What do you mean what do I think? About what?" 

"About what I ought to do. From now on." 

"It doesn't matter what I think," I said, taking a slug of cold beer. 

 



"That's all right. Tell me exactly what you think." 

"Well, if I were you, I'd leave him. I'd find someone with a more 
normal way of looking at things and live happily ever after. There's no 
way in hell you can be happy with him. The way he lives, it never 
crosses his mind to try to make himself happy or to make others 
happy. Staying with him will only wreck your nervous system. To me, 
it's already a miracle that you've been with him three years. Of course. 
I'm very fond of him in my own way. He's fun, and he has lots of great 
qualities. 

He has strengths and abilities that I could never hope to match. But in 
the end, his ideas about things and the way he lives his life are not 
normal. Sometimes, when I'm talking to him, I feel as if I'm going 
around and around in circles. The same process that takes him higher 
and higher leaves me going around in circles. It makes me feel so 
empty! Finally, our very systems are totally different. Do you see 
what I'm saying?" 

"I do," Hatsumi said as she brought me another beer from the fridge. 
"Plus, after he gets into the Foreign Ministry and does a year of 
training, he'll be going abroad. What are you going to do all that time? 
Wait for him? He has no intention of marrying anyone." 

"I know that, too." 

"So I've got nothing else to say." 

"I see," said Hatsumi. 

I slowly filled my glass with beer. 

"You know, when we were playing pool before, something popped 
into my mind," I said. "I was an only child, but all the time I was 
growing up I never once felt deprived or wished I had brothers or 
sisters. I was happy being alone. But all of a sudden, playing pool with 
you, I had this feeling that I wished I had had an elder sister like you - 
really chic aid a knockout in a midnight-blue dress and gold earrings 
and great with a pool cue." 

Hatsumi flashed me a happy smile. "That's got to be the nicest thing 

 



anybody's said to me in the past year," she said. "Really." 

"All I want for you," I said, blushing, "is for you to be happy. It's 
crazy, though. You seem like someone who could be happy with just 
about anybody, so how did you end up with Nagasawa of all people?" 

"Things like that just happen. There's probably not much you can do 
about them. It's certainly true in my case. Of course, Nagasawa would 
say it's my responsibility, not his.' 

"I'm sure he would." 

"But anyway, Tom, I'm not the smartest girl in the world. If anything. 
I'm sort of on the stupid side, and old-fashioned. I couldn't care less 
about "systems' and "responsibility'. All I want is to get married and 
have a man I love hold me in his arms every night and make babies. 
That's plenty for me. It's all I want out of life." 

"And what Nagasawa wants out of life has nothing to do with that." 
"People change, though, don't you think?" Hatsumi asked. "You mean, 
like, they go out into society and get a kick up the arse and grow up?" 
"Yeah. And if he's away from me for a long time, his feelings for me 
could change, don't you think?" 

"Maybe, if he were an ordinary guy," I said. "But he's different. He's 
incredibly strong-willed - stronger than you or I can imagine. And he 
only makes himself stronger with every day that goes by. If something 
smashes into him, he just works to make himself stronger. He’d eat 
slugs before he'd back down to anyone. What do you expect to get 
from a man like that?" 

"But there's nothing I can do but wait for him," said Hatsumi with her 
chin in her hand. 

"You love him that much?" 

"I do," she answered without a moment's hesitation. 

"Oh boy," I said with a sigh, drinking down the last of my beer. "It 
must be a wonderful thing to be so sure that you love somebody." 

"I'm a stupid, old-fashioned girl," she said. "Have another beer?" 

 



"No, thanks, I must get going. Thanks for the bandage and beer." 

As I was standing in the hallway putting on my shoes, the telephone 
rang. Hatsumi looked at me, looked at the phone, 
and looked at me again. 

"Good night," I said, stepping outside. As I shut the door, I caught a 
glimpse of Hatsumi picking up the receiver. It was the last time I ever 
saw her. 

It was 11.30 by the time I got back to the dorm. I went straight to 
Nagasawa's room and knocked on his door. After the tenth knock it 
occurred to me that this was Saturday night. Nagasawa always got 
overnight permission on Saturday nights, supposedly to stay at his 
relatives' house. 

I went back to my room, took off my tie, put my jacket and trousers 
on a hanger, changed into my pyjamas, and brushed my teeth. Oh no, I 
thought, tomorrow is Sunday again! Sundays seemed to be rolling 
around every four days. Another two Sundays and I would be 20 years 
old. I stretched out in bed and stared at my calendar as dark feelings 
washed over me. 

I sat at my desk to write my Sunday morning letter to Naoko, drinking 
coffee from a big cup and listening to old Miles Davis albums. A fine 
rain was falling outside, while my room had the chill of an aquarium. 
The smell of mothballs lingered in the thick jumper I had just taken 
out of a storage box. High up on the window-pane clung a huge, fat 
fly, unmoving. With no wind to stir it, the Rising Sun standard hung 
limp against the flagpole like the toga of a Roman senator. A skinny, 
timid-looking brown dog that had wandered into the quadrangle was 
sniffing every blossom in the flowerbed. I couldn't begin to imagine 
why any dog would have to go around sniffing flowers on a rainy day. 
My letter was a long one, and whenever my cut right palm began to 
hurt from holding the pen. I would let my eyes wander out to the rainy 

 



quadrangle. 

I began l ly telling Naoko how I had given my right hand a nasty cut 
while working in the record shop, then went on to say that Nagasawa, 
Hatsumi and I had had a sort of celebration the night before for 
Nagasawa's having passed his Foreign Ministry exam. I described the 
restaurant and the food. The meal was great, I said, but the atmosphere 
got uncomfortable halfway through. 

I wondered if I should write about Kizuki in connection with having 
played pool with Hatsumi and decided to go ahead. I felt it was 
something I ought to write about. 

I still remember the last shot Kizuki took that day - the day he died. It 
was a difficult cushion shot that I never expected him to get. Luck 
seemed to be with him, though: the shot was absolutely perfect, and 
the white and red balls hardly made a sound as they brushed each 
other on the green baize for the last score of the game. It was such a 
beautiful shot, I still have a vivid image of it to this day. For nearly 
two-and-a-half years after that, I never touched a cue. 

The night I played pool with Hatsumi, though, the thought of Kizuki 
never crossed my mind until the first game ended, and this came as a 
real shock to me. I had always assumed that I’d be reminded of Kizuki 
whenever I played pool. But not until the first game was over and I 
bought a Pepsi from a vending machine and started drinking it did I 
even think of him. It was the pool hall we used to play in. and we had 
often bet drinks on the outcome of our games. 

I felt guilty that I hadn't thought of Kizuki straight away, as if I had 
somehow abandoned him. Back in my room, though, I came to think 
of it like this: two and-a-half years have gone by since it happened, 
and Kizuki is still 17 years old. Not that this means my memory of 
him has faded. The things that his death gave rise to are still there, 
bright and clear, inside me, some of them even clearer than when they 
were new. What I want to say is this: I'm going to turn 20 soon. Part of 

 



what Kizuki and I shared when we were 16 and 17 has already 
vanished, and no amount of crying is going to bring that back. I can't 
explain it any better than this, but I think that you can probably under¬ 
stand what I felt and what I am trying to say. In fact, you are probably 
the only one in the world who can understand. 

I think of you now more than ever. It's raining today. Rainy Sundays 
are hard for me. When it rains I can't do laundry, which means I can't 
do ironing. I can't go walking, and I can't lie on the roof. About all I 
can do is put the record player on auto repeat and listen to Kind of 
Blue over and over while I watch the rain falling in the quadrangle. As 
I wrote to you earlier, I don't wind my spring on Sundays. That's why 
this letter is so damn long. I'm stopping now. I'm going to the dining 
hall for lunch. Goodbye. 

 




There was no sign of Midori at the next day's lecture, either. What had 
happened to her? Ten days had gone by since we last talked on the 
phone. I thought about calling her, but decided against it. She had said 
that she would call me. 

That Thursday I saw Nagasawa in the dining hall. He sat down next to 
me with a tray full of food and apologized for having made our 
"party" so unpleasant. 

"Never mind," I said. "I should be thanking you for a great dinner. I 
have to admit, though, it was a funny way to celebrate your first job." 
"You can say that again." 

A few minutes went by as we ate in silence. "I made up with 
Hatsumi," he said. 

"I'm not surprised." 

"I was kind of tough on you, too, as I recall it." 

"What's with all the apologizing?" I asked. "Are you ill?" 

"I may be," he said with a few little nods. "Hatsumi tells me you told 
her to leave me." 

"It only makes sense," I said. 

"Yeah, I s'pose so," said Nagasawa. 

"She's a great girl," I said, slurping my miso soup. 

"I know," he said with a sigh. "A little too great for me." 

I was sleeping the sleep of death when the buzzer rang to let me know 
I had a call. It brought me back from the absolute core of sleep in total 

 



confusion. I felt as if I had been sleeping with my head soaked in 
water until my brain swelled up. The clock said 6.15 but I had no idea 
if that meant a.m. or p.m., and I couldn't remember what day it was. I 
looked out of the window and realized there was no flag on the pole. It 
was probably p.m. So, raising that flag served some purpose after all. 
"Hey, Watanabe, are you free now?" Midori asked. 

"I don't know, what day is it?" 

"Friday." 

"Morning or evening?" 

"Evening, of course! You're so weird! Let's see, it’s, uh, 6.18 p.m." 

So it was p.m. after all! That's right, I had been stretched out on my 
bed reading a book when I dozed off. Friday. My head started 
working. I didn't have to go to the record shop on Friday nights. 
"Yeah, I'm free. Where are you?" 

"Ueno Station. Why don't you meet me in Shinjuku? I'll leave now." 

We set a time and place and hung up. 

When I got to DUG, Midori was sitting at the far end of the counter 
with a drink. She wore a man's wrinkled, white balmacaan coat, a thin 
yellow jumper, blue jeans, and two bracelets on one wrist. 

"What're you drinking?" I asked. 

"Tom Collins." 

I ordered a whisky and soda, then realized there was a big suitcase by 
Midori's feet. 

I went away," she said. "Just got back." 

"Where'd you go?" 

"South to Nara and north to Aomori." 

"On the same trip?!" 

"Don't be stupid. I may be strange, but I can't go north and south at the 
same time. I went to Nara with my boyfriend, and then took off to 
Aomori alone." 

 



I sipped my whisky and soda, then struck a match to light the 
Marlboro that Midori held between her lips. "You must have had a 
terrible time, what with the funeral and everything." 

"Nah, a funeral's a piece of cake. We've had plenty of practice. You 
put on a black kimono and sit there like a lady and everybody else 
takes care of business - an uncle, a neighbour, like that. They bring the 
sake, order the sushi, say comforting things, cry, carry on. divide up 
the keepsakes. It's a breeze. A picnic. Compared to nursing someone 
day after day, it's an absolute picnic. We were drained, my sister and 
me. We couldn’t even cry. We didn't have any tears left. Really. 
Except, when you do that, they start whispering about you: "Those 
girls are as cold as ice.’ So then, we’re never going to cry, that’s just 
how the two of us are. I know we could have faked it, but we would 
never do anything like that. The bastards! The more they wanted to 
see us cry, the more determined we were not to give them the 
satisfaction. My sister and I are totally different types, but when it 
comes to something like that, we’re in absolute sync." 

Midori's bracelets jangled on her arm as she waved to the waiter and 
ordered another Tom Collins and a small bowl of pistachios. 

"So then, after the funeral ended and everybody went home, the two of 
us drank sake till the sun went down. Polished off one of those huge 
half-gallon bottles, and half of another one, aid the whole time we 
were dumping on everybody - 

this one's an idiot, that one's a shithead, one guy looks like a mangy 
dog, another one's a pig, so-and-so's a hypocrite, that one's a crook. 
You have no idea how great it felt!" 

"I can imagine." 

"We got pissed and went to bed - both of us out cold. We slept for 
hours, and if the phone rang or something, we just let it go. Dead to 
the world. Finally, after we woke up, we ordered sushi and talked 
about what to do. We decided to close the shop for a while and enjoy 
ourselves. We'd been killing ourselves for months and we deserved a 

 



break. My sister just wanted to hang around with her boyfriend for a 
while, and I decided I'd take mine on a trip for a couple of days and 
fuck like crazy." Midori clamped her mouth shut and rubbed her ears. 
"Oops, sorry." 

"That's OK," I said. "So you went to Nara." 

"Yeah, I’ve always liked that place. The temples, the deer park." 

"And did you fuck like crazy?" 

"No, not at all, not even once," she said with a sigh. "The second we 
walked into the hotel room and dumped our bags, my period started. A 
real gusher." 

I couldn't help laughing. 

"Hey, it’s not funny. I was a week early! I couldn’t stop crying when 
that happened. I think all the stress threw me off. My boyfriend got 
sooo angry! He’s like that: he gets angry straight away. It wasn't my 
fault, though. It's not like I wanted to get my period. And, well, mine 
are kind of on the heavy side anyway. The first day or two, I don't 
want to do anything. Make sure you keep away from me then." 

"I’d like to, but how can I tell?" I asked. 

"OK. I'll wear a hat for a couple of days after my period starts. A red 
one. That should work," she said with a laugh "If you see me on the 
street and I'm wearing a red hat, don't talk to me, just run away." 

"Great. I wish all girls would do that," I said. "So anyway what did 
you do in Nara?" 

"What else could we do? We fed the deer and walked all over the 
place. It was just awful! We had a big fight and I haven't seen him 
since we got back. I hung around for a couple of days and decided to 
take a nice trip all by myself. So I went to Aomori. I stayed with a 
friend in Hirosaki for the first two nights, and then I started travelling 
around - Shimokita, Tappi, places like that. They're nice. I once wrote 
a map brochure for the area. Ever been there?" 

"Never." 

"So anyway," said Midori, sipping her Tom Collins, then wrenching 

 



open a pistachio, "the whole time I was travelling by myself, I was 
thinking of you. I was thinking how nice it would be if I could have 
you with me." 

"How come?" 

"How come?!" Midori looked at me with eyes focused on nothingness. 
"What do you mean "How come?'?!" 

"Just that. How come you were thinking of me?" 

"Maybe because I like you, that's how come! Why else would I be 
thinking of you? Who would ever think they wanted to be with 
somebody they didn’t like?" 

"But you've got a boyfriend," I said. "You don't have to think about 
me." I took a slow sip of my whisky and soda. "Meaning I'm not 
allowed to think about you if I've got a boyfriend?" 

"No, that's not it, I just -" 

"Now get this straight, Watanabe," said Midori, pointing at me. "I'm 
warning you. I've got a whole month's worth of misery crammed 
inside me and getting ready to blow. So watch what you say to me. 
Any more of that kind of stuff and I’ll flood this place with tears. Once 
I get started. I'm good for the whole night. Are you ready for that? I'm 
an absolute animal when I start crying, it doesn't matter where I am! 
I'm not joking." 

I nodded and kept quiet. I ordered a second whisky and soda and ate a 
few pistachios. Somewhere behind the sound of a sloshing shaker and 
clinking glasses and the scrape of an ice maker, Sarah Vaughan sang 
an old-fashioned love song. 

"Things haven't been right between me and my boyfriend ever since 
the tampon incident." 

"Tampon incident?" 

"Yeah, I was out drinking with him and a few of his friends about a 
month ago and I told them the story of a woman in my neighbourhood 
who blew out a tampon when she sneezed. Funny, right?" 

"That is funny," I said with a laugh. 

 



"Yeah, all the other guys thought so, too. But he got mad and said I 
shouldn't be talking about such dirty things. Such a wet blanket!" 
"Wow." 

"He’s a wonderful guy, but he can be really narrow-minded when it 
comes to stuff like that," said Midori. "Like, he gets mad if I wear 
anything but white underwear. Don’t you think that’s narrow-minded?" 
"Maybe so," I said, "but it’s just a matter of taste." It seemed 
incredible to me that a guy like that would want a girlfriend like 
Midori, but I kept this thought to myself. 

"So, what have you been doing?" she asked. 

"Nothing. Same as ever," I said, but then I recalled my attempt to 
masturbate while thinking of Midori as I had promised to do. I told her 
about it in a low voice that wouldn’t carry to the others around us. 
Midori's eyes lit up and she snapped her fingers. "How’d it go? Was it 
good?" 

"Nah, I got embarrassed halfway through and stopped." "You mean 
you lost your erection ?" 

"Pretty much." 

"Damn," she said, shooting a look of annoyance at me. "You can't let 
yourself get embarrassed. Think about something really sexy. It's OK. 
I'm giving you pennission. Hey, I know what! Next time I'll get on the 
phone with you: "Oh, oh, that's great... Oh, I feel it... Stop, I'm gonna 
come ... Oh, don’t do that!' I'll say stuff like that to you while you're 
doing it." 

"The dormitory phone is in the lobby by the front door, with people 
coming in and out all the time," I explained. "The dorm Head would 
kill me with his bare hands if he saw me wanking in a place like that." 
"Oh, too bad." 

"Never mind," I said. "I'll try again by myself one of these days." 

"Give it your best shot," said Midori. "I will," I said. 

"I wonder if it's me," she said. "Maybe I'm just not Innately." 

"That's not it," I assured her. "It's more a question of attitude." 

 



"You know," she said, "I have this tremendously sensitive back. The 
soft touch of fingers all over ... mmmmm." "I'll keep that in mind." 
"Hey, why don’t we go now and see a dirty film?" Midori suggested. 
"A really filthy S&M one." 

We went from the bar to an eel shop, and from there to one of 
Shinjuku's most run-down adult cinemas to see a triple bill. It was the 
only place we could find in the paper that was showing S&M stuff. 
Inside, the cinema had some kind of indefinable smell. Our timing 
was good: the S&M film was just starting as we took our seats. It was 
the story of a secretary and her schoolgirl sister being kidnapped by a 
bunch of men and subjected to sadistic tortures. The men made the 
older one to do all kinds of awful things by threatening to rape the 
sister, but soon the older sister is transformed into a raging masochist, 
and the younger one gets really turned on from having to watch all the 
contortions they put her through. It was such a gloomy, repetitive film, 
I got bored after a while. 

"If I were the younger sister, I wouldn't get worked up so easily," said 
Midori. "I’d keep watching." 

"I’m sure you would." I said. 

"And anyway, don’t you think her nipples are too dark for a schoolgirl 
- a virgin?" 

"Absolutely." 

Midori's eyes were glued to the screen. I was impressed: anyone 
watching a film with such fierce intensity was getting more than her 
money's worth. She kept reporting her thoughts to me: "Oh my God, 
will you look at that!" or "Three guys at once! They're going to tear 
her apart!" or "I’d like to try that on somebody, Watanabe." I was 
enjoying Midori a lot more than the film. 

When the lights went up during the intermission, I realized there were 
no other women in the place. One young man sitting near us - 
probably a student - took one look at Midori and changed his seat to 

 



the far side. 

"Tell me, Watanabe, do you get hard watching this kind of stuff?" 

"Well, yeah, sometimes," I said. "That's why they make these films." 

"So what you're saying is, every time one of those scenes starts, every 
man in the cinema has his thing standing to attention? Thirty or forty 
of them sticking up all at once? It's so weird if you stop and think 
about it, don't you think?" 

"Yeah, I guess so, now you mention it." 

The second feature was a fairly normal pom flick, which meant it was 
even more boring than the first. It had lots of oral sex scenes, and 
every time they started doing fellatio or cunnilingus or sixty-nine the 
soundtrack would fill the cinema with loud sucking or slurping sound 
effects. Listening to them, I felt strangely moved to think that I was 
living out my life on this bizarre planet of ours. 

"Who comes up with these sounds, I wonder," I said to Midori. 

"I think they're great!" she said. 

There was also a sound for a penis moving in and out of a vagina. I 
had never realized that such sounds even existed. The man was into a 
lot of heavy breathing, and the woman came up with the usual sort of 
expressions - "Yes!" or "More!" - as she writhed under him. You 
could also hear the bed creaking. These scenes just went on and on. 
Midori seemed to be enjoying them at first, but even she got bored 
after a while and suggested we leave. We went outside and took a few 
deep breaths. This was the first time in my life the outside air of 
Shinjuku felt healthy to me. 

"That was fun," said Midori. "Let's try it again sometime." 

"They just keep doing the same things," I said. 

"Well, what else can they do? We all just keep doing the same things." 
She had a point there. 

We found another bar and ordered drinks. I had more whisky, and 
Midori drank three or four cocktails of some indefinable kind. Outside 
again, Midori said she wanted to climb a tree. 

 



"There aren't any trees around here," I said. "And even if there were, 
you're too wobbly to do any climbing." 

"You're always so damn sensible, you ruin everything. I'm drunk 
'cause I wanna be drunk. What's wrong with that? And even if I am 
drunk, I can still climb a tree. Shit, I'm gonna climb all the way to the 
top of a great, big, tall tree and I'm gonna pee all over everybody!" 

"You wouldn’t happen to need the toilet by any chance?" 

"Yup. 

I took Midori to a pay toilet in Shinjuku Station, put a coin in the slot 
and bundled her inside, then bought an evening paper at a nearby 
stand and read it while I waited for her to come out. But she didn’t 
come out. I started getting worried after 15 minutes and was ready to 
go and check on her when she finally emerged looking pale. 

"Sorry," she said. "I fell asleep." 

"Are you OK?" I asked, putting my coat around her shoulders. 

"Not really," she said. 

"I'll take you home. You just have to get home, take a nice, long bath 
and go to bed. You're exhausted." 

"I am not going home. What's the point? Nobody's there. I don’t want 
to sleep all by myself in a place like that." 

"Terrific," I said. "So what are you going to do?" 

"Go to some love hotel around here and sleep with your arms around 
me all night. Like a log. Tomorrow morning we'll have breakfast 
somewhere and go to lectures together." 

"You were planning this all along, weren't you? That's why you called 
me." 

"Of course. 

"You should have called your boyfriend, not me. That's the only thing 
that makes sense. That's what boyfriends are for." 

"But I want to be with you." 

"You can't be with me," I said. "First of all, I have to be back in the 
dorm by midnight. Otherwise, I'll break curfew. The one time I did 

 



that there was all hell to pay. And secondly, if I go to bed with a girl. 
I'm going to want to do it with her, and the last thing I want is to lie 
there struggling to restrain myself. I'm not kidding, I might end up 
forcing you." 

"You mean you’d hit me and tie me up and rape me from behind?" 

"Hey, look. I'm serious." 

"But I'm so lonely! I want to be with someone! I know I'm doing 
terrible things to you, making demands and not giving you anything in 
return, saying whatever pops into my head, dragging you out of your 
room and forcing you to take me everywhere, but you're the only one I 
can do stuff like that to! I've never been able to have my own way 
with anybody, not once in the 20 years I've been alive. My father, my 
mother, they never paid the slightest attention to me, and my 
boyfriend, well, he's just not that kind of guy. He gets angry if I try to 
have my own way. So we end up fighting. You're the only one I can 
say these things to. And now I'm really, really, really tired and I want 
to fall asleep listening to someone tell me how much they like me and 
how pretty I am and stuff. That's all I want. And when I wake up. I'll 
be full of energy and I'll never make these kinds of selfish demands 
again. I swear. I'll be a good girl." 

"I hear you, believe me, but there's nothing I can do." 

"Oh, please! Otherwise, I'm going to sit down right here on the ground 
and cry my head off all night long. And I'll sleep with the first guy that 
talks to me." 

That did it. I called the dorm and asked for Nagasawa. 

When he got to the phone I asked him if he would make it look as if I 
had come back for the evening. I was with a girl, I explained. 

"Fine," he said. "It's a worthy cause. I'll be glad to help you out. I'll 
just turn over your name tag to the "in’ side. Don't worry. Take all the 
time you need. You can come in through my window in the morning." 
"Thanks. I owe you one," I said and hung up. "All set?" Midori asked. 
"Pretty much," I said with a sigh. "Great, let's go to a disco, it's so 

 



early." "Wait a minute, I thought you were tired." "For something like 
this. I'm just fine." "Oh boy." 

And she was right. We went to a disco, and her energy came back 
little by little as we danced. She drank two whisky and cokes, and 
stayed on the dance floor until her forehead was drenched in sweat. 
"This is so much fun!" she exclaimed when we took a break at a table. 
"I haven't danced like this in ages. I don't know, when you move your 
body, it's kind of like your spirit gets liberated." 

"Your spirit is always liberated. I'd say." 

"No way," she said, shaking her head and smiling. "Anyway, now that 
I'm feeling better, I'm starved! Let's go for a pizza." 

I took her to a pizzeria I knew and ordered draught beer and an 
anchovy pizza. I wasn't very hungry and ate only lour of the twelve 
slices. Midori finished the rest. 

"You sure made a fast recovery," I said. "Not too long ago you were 
pale and wobbly." 

"It's because my selfish demands got through to somebody,,, she 
answered. "It unclogged me. Wow, this pizza is great!', 

"Tell me, though. Is there really nobody at home?" 

"It's true. My sister's staying at her friend's place. Now, that girl's got 
a real case of the creeps. She can't sleep alone in the house if I'm not 
there." 

"Let's forget this love hotel crap, then. Going to a place like that just 
makes you feel cheap. Let's go to your house. You must have enough 
bedding for me?" 

Midori thought about it for a minute, then nodded. "OK, we'll spend 
the night at mine." 

We took the Yamanote Line to Otsuka, and soon we were raising the 
metal shutter that sealed off the front of the Kobayashi Bookshop. A 
paper sign on the shutter read TEMPORARILY CLOSED. The smell 
of old paper filled the dark shop, as if the shutter had not been opened 
for a long time. Half the shelves were empty, and most of the 

 



magazines had been tied in bundles for returns. That hollow, chilly 
feeling I had experienced on my first visit had only deepened. The 
place looked like a hulk abandoned on the shore. 

"You're not planning to open shop again?" I asked. 

"Nah, we're going to sell it," said Midori. "We'll divide the money and 
live on our own for a while without anybody's "protection’. My sister's 
getting married next year, and I've got three more years at university. 
We ought to make enough to see us through that much at least. I'll 
keep my part-time job, too. Once the place is sold. I'll live with my 
sister in a flat for a while." 

"You think somebody'll want to buy it? 

"Probably. I know somebody who wants to open a wool shop, She's 
been asking me recently if I want to sell. Poor Dad, though. He 
worked so hard to get this place, and he was paying off the loan he 
took out little by little, and in the end he hardly had anything left. It all 
melted away, like foam on a river." 

"He had you, though," I said. 

"Me?!" Midori said with a laugh. She took a deep breath and let it out. 
"Let's go upstairs. It's cold down here." 

Upstairs, she sat me at the kitchen table and went to warm the bath 
water. While she busied herself with that, I put a kettle on to boil and 
made tea. Waiting for the tank to heat up, we sat across from each 
other at the kitchen table and drank tea. Chin in hand, she took a long, 
hard look at me. There were no sounds other than the ticking of the 
clock and the hum of the fridge motor turning on and off as the 
thermostat kicked in and out. The clock showed that midnight was fast 
approaching. 

"You know, Watanabe, study it hard enough, and you've got a pretty 
interesting face." 

"Think so?" I asked, a bit hurt. 

"A nice face goes a long way with me," she said. "And yours ... well, 
the more I look at it, the more I get to thinking, "He'll do'." 

 



"Me, too," I said. "Every once in a while, I think about myself, "What 
the hell. I’ll do’." 

"Hey, I don't mean that in a bad way. I'm not very good at putting my 
feelings into words. That's why people misunderstand me. All I'm 
trying to say is I like you. Have I told you that before?" 

"You have," I said. 

"I mean. I'm not the only one who has trouble working out what men 
are all about. But I'm getting there, a little at a time." 

Midori brought over a box of Marlboro and lit one up. "When you 
start at zero, you've got a lot to learn." "I wouldn’t be surprised." 

"Oh, I almost forgot! You want to burn a stick of incense for my 
father?" 

I followed Midori to the room with the Buddhist altar, lit a stick of 
incense in front of her father's photo, and brought my hands together. 
"Know what I did the other day?" Midori asked. "I got all naked in 
front of my father's picture. Took off every stitch of clothing and let 
him have a good, long look. Kind of in a yoga position. Like, "Here, 
Daddy, these are my tits, and this is my cunt'." 

"Why in the hell would you do something like that?" I asked. 

"I don't know, I just wanted to show him. I mean, half of me comes 
from his sperm, right? Why shouldn’t I show him? "Here's the 
daughter you made.' I was a little drunk at the time. I suppose that had 
something to do with it." 

"I suppose." 

"My sister walked in and almost fell over. There I was in front of my 
father's memorial portrait all naked with my legs spread. I guess you 
would be kind of surprised." "I s'pose so." 

"I explained why I was doing it and said. "So take off your clothes too 
Morno (her name's Momo), and sit down next to me and show him,' 
but she wouldn't do it. She went away shocked. She has this really 
conservative streak." 

"In other words, she’s relatively normal, you mean." 

 



"Tell me, Watanabe, what did you think of my father?" 

"I'm not good with people I've just met, but it didn’t bother me being 
alone with him. I felt pretty comfortable. 

We talked about all kinds of stuff." 

-What kind of stuff?" 

-Euripides," I said. 

Midori laughed out loud. "You're so weird! Nobody talks about 
Euripides with a dying person they've just met!" 

,,Well, nobody sits in front of her father's memorial portrait with her 
legs spread, either!" 

Midori chuckled and gave the altar bell a ring. "Night-night, Daddy. 
We're going to have some fun now, so don’t worry and get some sleep. 
You're not suffering any more, right? You're dead, OK? I'm sure 
you're not suffering. If you are, you'd better complain to the gods. Tell 
'em it's just too cruel. I hope you meet Mum and the two of you really 
do it. I saw your willy when I helped you pee. It was pretty 
impressive! So give it everything you've got. Goodnight." 

We took turns in the bath and changed into pyjamas. I borrowed a 
nearly new pair of her father's. They were a little small but better than 
nothing. Midori spread out a mattress for me on the floor of the altar 
room. 

"You're not scared sleeping in front of the altar?" she asked. 

"Not at all. I haven't done anything bad," I said with a smile. 

"But you're going to stay with me and hold me until I fall asleep, 
right?" 

"Right," I said. 

Practically falling over the edge of Midori's little bed, I held her in my 
arms. Nose against my chest, she placed her hands on my hips. My 
right arm curled around her back while I tried to keep from falling out 
by hanging on to the bed frame with my left hand. It was not exactly a 

 



situation conducive to sexual excitement. My nose was resting on her 
head and her short-cut hair would tickle every now and then. 

"Come on. say something to me," Midori said, her face buried in my 
chest. 

"What do you want me to say?" 

"Anything. Something to make me feel good." "You're really cute," I 
said. 

" - Midori," she said. "Say my name." 

"You're really cute, Midori," I corrected myself. "What do you mean 
really cute?" 

"So cute the mountains crumble and the oceans dry up." Midori lifted 
her face and looked at me. "You have this special way with words." 

"I can feel my heart softening when you say that," I said, smiling. 

"Say something even nicer." 

"I really like you, Midori. A lot." 

"How much is a lot?" 

"Like a spring bear," I said. 

"A spring bear?" Midori looked up again. "What's that all about? A 
spring bear." 

"You're walking through a field all by yourself one day in spring, and 
this sweet little bear cub with velvet fur and shiny little eyes comes 
walking along. And he says to you, "Hi. there, little lady. Want to 
tumble with me?' So you and the bear cub spend the whole day in each 
other's arms, tumbling down this clover-covered hill. Nice, huh?" 
"Yeah. Really nice." 

"That's how much I like you." 

"That is the best thing I've ever heard," said Midori, cuddling up 
against my chest. "If you like me that much, you'll do anything I tell 
you to do, right? You won't get angry, right?" 

"No, of course not." 

"And you'll take care of me always and always." 

,,0/course I will," I said, stroking her short, soft, boyish hair. "Don’t 

 



worry, everything is going to be fine." 

"But I'm scared," she said. 

I held her softly, and soon her shoulders were rising and falling, and I 
could hear the regular breathing of sleep. I slipped out of her bed and 
went to the kitchen, where I drank a beer. I wasn't the least bit sleepy, 
so I thought about reading a book, but I couldn’t find anything worth 
reading nearby. I considered returning to Midori's room to look for 
one, but I didn’t want to wake her by rummaging around while she 
was sleeping. 

I sat there staring into space for a while, sipping my beer, when it 
occurred to me that I was in a bookshop. I went downstairs, switched 
on the light and started looking through the paperback shelves. There 
wasn't much that appealed to me, and most of what did I had read 
already, but I had to have something to read no matter what. I picked a 
discoloured copy of Hermann Hesse's Beneath the Wheel that must 
have been hanging around the shop unsold for a long time, and left the 
money for it by the till. This was my small contribution to reducing 
the debts of the Kobayashi Bookshop. 

I sat at the kitchen table, drinking my beer and reading Beneath the 
Wheel. I had first read the novel the year I entered school. And now, 
about eight years later, here I was, reading the same book in a girl's 
kitchen, wearing the undersized pyjamas of her dead father. Funny. If 
it hadn't been for these strange circumstances, I would probably never 
have reread 
Beneath the Wheel. 

The book did have its dated moments, but as a novel it wasn't bad. I 
moved through it slowly, enjoying it line by line, in the hushed 
bookshop in the middle of the night. A dusty bottle of brandy stood on 
a shelf in the kitchen. I poured a little into a coffee cup and sipped it. 
It warmed me but did nothing to help me feel sleepy. 

I went to check on Midori a little before three, but she was fast asleep. 
She must have been exhausted. The lights from the block of shops 

 



beyond the window cast a soft white glow, like moonlight, over the 
room. Midori slept with her back to the light. She lay so perfectly still, 
she might have been frozen stiff. Bending over, I caught the sound of 
her breathing. She slept just like her father. 

The suitcase from her recent travels stood by the bed. Her white coat 
hung on the back of a chair. Her desktop was neatly arranged, and on 
the wall over it hung a Snoopy calendar. I nudged the curtain aside 
and looked down at the deserted shops. Every shop was closed, their 
metal shutters down, the vending machines hunched in front of the 
off-licence the only sign of something waiting for the dawn. The moan 
of longdistance lorry tyres sent a deep shudder through the air every 
now and then. I went back to the kitchen, poured myself another shot 
of brandy, and went on reading Beneath the Wheel. 

By the time I had finished it the sky was growing light. I made myself 
some instant coffee and used some notepaper and a ballpoint pen I 
found on the table to write a message to Midori: I drank some of your 
brandy. I bought a copy o/Beneath the Wheel. It's light outside, so I'm 
going home. Goodbye. Then, after some hesitation, I wrote: You look 
really cute when you're sleeping. I washed my coffee cup, switched 
off the kitchen light, went downstairs, quietly lifted the shutter, and 
stepped outside. I worried that a neighbour might find me suspicious, 
but there was no one on the street at 5.50-something in the morning. 
Only the crows were on their usual rooftop perch, glaring down at the 
street. I glanced up at the pale pink curtains in Midori's window, 
walked to the tram stop, rode to the end of the line, and walked to my 
dorm. On the way I found an open cafe and ate a breakfast of rice and 
miso soup, pickled vegetables and fried eggs. Circling around to the 
back of the dorm, I tapped on Nagasawa's ground-floor window. He 
let me in immediately. 

"Coffee?" he asked. 

"Nah." 

I thanked him, went up to my room, brushed my teeth, took my 

 



trousers off, got under the covers, and clamped my eyes shut. Finally, 
a dreamless sleep closed over me like a heavy lead door. 

I wrote to Naoko every week, and she often wrote back. Her letters 
were never very long. Soon there were references to the cold 
November mornings and evenings. 

You went back to Tokyo just about the time the autumn weather was 
deepening, so for a time I couldn't tell whether the hole that opened up 
inside me was from missing you or from the change of the season. 
Reiko and I talk about you all the time. She says be sure to say "Hi" to 
you. She is as nice to me as ever. I don’t think I would have been able 
to stand this place if I didn't have her with me. I cry when I'm lonely. 
Reiko says it's good I can cry. But feeling lonely really hurts. When 
I'm lonely at night, people talk to me from the darkness. They talk to 
me the way trees moan in the wind at night. Kizuki; my sister: they 
talk to me like that all the time. They're lonely, too, and looking for 
someone to talk to. 

I often reread your letters at night when I'm lonely and in pain. I get 
confused by a lot of things that come from outside, but your 
descriptions of the world around you give me wonderful relief. It's so 
strange! I wonder why that should be? So I read them over and over, 
and Reiko reads them, too. Then we talk about the things you tell me. 
I really liked the part about that girl Midori's father. We look forward 
to getting your letter every week as one of our few entertainments - 
yes, in a place like this, letters are our entertainments. 

I try my best to set aside a time in the week for writing to you, but 
once I actually sit down in front of the blank sheet of paper, I begin to 
feel depressed. I'm really having to push myself to write this letter, 
too. Reiko's been yelling at me to answer you. Don't get me wrong, 
though. I have tons of things I want to talk to you about, to tell you 
about. It's just hard for me to put them into words. Which is why it's 

 



so painful for me to write letters. 

Speaking of Midori, she sounds like an interesting person. Reading 
your letter, I got the feeling she might be in love with you. When I 
told that to Reiko, she said, "Well, of course she is! Even I am in love 
with Watanabe!' We're picking mushrooms and gathering chestnuts 
and eating them every day. And I do mean every day: rice with 
chestnuts, rice with matsutake mushrooms, but they taste so great, we 
never get tired of them. Reiko doesn't eat that much, though. For her, 
it’s still one cigarette after another. The birds and the rabbits are doing 
fine. 

Goodbye. 

Three days after my twentieth birthday, a package arrived for me from 
Naoko. Inside I found a wine-coloured crew neck pullover and a 
letter. 

Happy Birthday! I hope you have a happy year being 20. My own year 
of being 20 looks like it’s going to end with me as miserable as ever, 
but I'd really like it if you could have your share of happiness and 
mine combined. Really. Reiko and I each knitted half of this jumper. 
If I had done it all by myself, it would have taken until next 
Valentine's Day. The good half is Reiko's, and the bad half is mine. 
Reiko is so good at everything she does, I sometimes hate myself 
when I'm watching her. I mean, there's not a single thing I'm really 
good at! 

Goodbye. 

Be well. 

The package had a short note from Reiko, too. 

How are you? For you, Naoko may be the pinnacle of happiness, but 
for me she's just a clumsy girl. Still, we managed to finish this jumper 
in time for your birthday. Handsome, isn't it? We chose the colour and 

 



the style. 

Happy Birthday. 

 



Thinking back on the year 1969, all that comes to mind for me is a 
swamp - a deep, sticky bog that feels as if it's going to suck off my 
shoe each time I take a step. I walk through the mud, exhausted. In 
front of me, behind me, I can see nothing but the endless darkness of a 
swamp. 

Time itself slogged along in rhythm with my faltering steps. The 
people around me had gone on ahead long before, while my time and I 
hung back, struggling through the mud. The world around me was on 
the verge of great transformations. Death had already taken John 
Coltrane who was joined now by so many others. People screamed 
there'd be revolutionary changes - which always seemed to be just 
ahead, at the curve in the road. But the "changes" that came were just 
two-dimensional stage sets, backdrops without substance or meaning. 
I trudged along through each day in its turn, rarely looking up, eyes 
locked on the never-ending swamp that lay before me, planting my 
right foot, raising my left, planting my left foot, raising my right, 
never sure where I was, never sure I was headed in the right direction, 
knowing only that I had to keep moving, one step at a time. 

I turned 20, autumn gave way to winter, but in my life nothing 
changed in any significant way. Unexcited, I went to my lectures, 
worked three nights a week in the record shop reread The Great 
Gatsby now and then, and when Sunday came I would do my washing 
and write a long letter to Naoko. Sometimes I would go out with 
Midori for a meal or to the zoo or to the cinema. The sale of the 
Kobayashi Bookshop went as planned, and Midori and her sister 
moved into a two-bedroom flat near Myogadani, a more upmarket 
neighbourhood. Midori would move out when her sister got married, 
and rent a flat by herself, she said. Meanwhile, she invited me to their 



new place for lunch once. It was a sunny, handsome flat, and Midori 
seemed to enjoy living there far more than she had above the 
Kobayashi Bookshop. 

Every once in a while, Nagasawa would suggest that we go out on one 
of our excursions, but I always found something else to do instead. I 
just didn't want the hassle. Not that I didn't like the idea of sleeping 
with girls: it was just that, when I thought about the whole process I 
had to go through - drinking in town, looking for the right kind of 
girls, talking to them, going to a hotel - it was all too much effort. I 
had to admire Nagasawa all the more for the way he could continue 
the ritual without ever getting sick and tired of it. Maybe what 
Hatsumi had said to me had had some effect: I could make myself feel 
far happier just thinking about Naoko than sleeping with some stupid, 
anonymous girl. The sensation of Naoko’s fingers bringing me to 
climax in a grassy field remained vivid inside me. 

I wrote to her at the beginning of December to ask if it would be all 
right for me to come and visit her during the winter holidays. An 
answer came from Reiko saying they would love to have me. She 
explained that Naoko was having trouble writing and that she was 
answering for her. I was not to take this to mean that Naoko was 
feeling especially bad: there was no need for me to worry. These 
things came in waves. 

When the holidays came, I stuffed my things into my rucksack, put on 
snow boots and set out for Kyoto. The odd doctor had been right: the 
winter mountains blanketed in snow were incredibly beautiful. As 
before, I slept two nights in the flat with Naoko and Reiko, and spent 
three days with them doing much the same kind of things as before. 
When the sun went down, Reiko would play her guitar and the three 
of us would sit around talking. Instead of our picnic, we went cross¬ 
country skiing. An hour of tramping through the woods on skis left us 
breathless and sweaty. We also joined the residents and staff 

 



shovelling snow when there was time. Doctor Miyata popped over to 
our table at dinner to explain why people's middle fingers are longer 
than their index fingers, while with toes it worked the other way. The 
gatekeeper, Omura, talked to me again about Tokyo pork. Reiko 
enjoyed the records I brought as gifts from the city. She transcribed a 
few tunes and worked them out on her guitar. 

Naoko was even less talkative than she had been in the autumn. When 
the three of us were together, she would sit on the sofa, smiling, and 
hardly say a word. Reiko seemed to be chattering away to make up for 
her. "But don't worry," Naoko told me. "This is just one of those 
times. It's a lot more fun for me to listen to you two than to talk 
myself." 

Reiko gave herself some chores that took her out of the flat so that 
Naoko and I could get in bed. I kissed her neck and shoulders and 
breasts, and she used her hands to bring me to climax as before. 
Afterwards, holding her close, I told her how her touch had stayed 
with me these two months, that I had thought of her and masturbated. 
"You haven't slept with anybody else?" Naoko asked. "Not once," I 
said. 

"All right, then, here’s something else for you to remember." She slid 
down and kissed my penis, then enveloped it in her warm mouth and 
ran her tongue all over it, her long, straight hair swaying over my 
belly and groin with each movement of her lips until I came a second 
time. 

"Do you think you can remember that?" she asked. 

"Of course I can," I said. "I'll always remember it." 

I held her tight and slid my hand inside her panties, touching her still- 
dry vagina. Naoko shook her head and pulled my hand away. We held 
each other for a time, saying nothing. 

"I'm thinking of getting out of the dorm when term ends and looking 
for a flat," I said. "I've had it with dorm life. If I keep working part- 
time I can pretty much cover my expenses. How about coming to 

 



Tokyo to live with me, the way I suggested before?" 

"Oh, Tom, thank you. I'm so happy that you would ask me to do 
something like that!" 

"It's not that I think there's anything wrong with this place," I said. 
"It's quiet, the surroundings are perfect, and Reiko is a wonderful 
person. But it's not a place to stay for a long time. It's too specialized 
for a long stay. The longer you're here, I'm sure, the harder it is to 
leave." 

Instead of answering, Naoko turned her gaze to the outside. Beyond 
the window, there was nothing to see but snow. Snow clouds hung 
low and heavy in the sky, with only the smallest gap between them 
and the snow-covered earth. 

"Take your time, think it over," I said. "Whatever happens. I'm going 
to move by the end of March. Any time you decide you want to join 
me, you can come." 

Naoko nodded. I wrapped my arms around her as carefully as if I had 
been holding a work of art delicately fashioned from glass. She put 
her arms around my neck. I was naked, and she wore only the 
skimpiest white underwear. Her body was so beautiful, I could have 
enjoyed looking at it all day. 

"Why don’t I get wet?" Naoko murmured. "That one time was the only 
time it ever happened. The day of my twentieth birthday, that April. 
The night you held me in your arms. What is wrong with me?" 

"It's strictly psychological. I'm sure," I said. "Give it time. There's no 
hurry." 

"All of my problems are strictly psychological," said Naoko. "What if 
I never get better? What if I can never have sex for the rest of my life? 
Can you keep loving me just the same? Will hands and lips always be 
enough for you? Or will you solve the sex problem by sleeping with 
other girls?" 

"I'm a bom optimist," I said. 

Naoko sat up in bed and slipped on a T-shirt. She put a flannel shirt 

 



over this, and then climbed into her jeans. I put my clothes on, too. 

"Let me think about it," said Naoko. "And you think about it, too." 

"I will," I said. "And speaking of lips, what you did with them just 
now was great." 

She reddened slightly and gave a little smile. "Kizuki used to say that, 
too." 

"He and I had pretty much the same tastes and opinions," I said, 
smiling. 

We sat across from each other at the kitchen table, drinking coffee and 
talking about the old days. She was beginning to talk more about 
Kizuki. She would hesitate, and choose her words carefully. Every 
now and then, the snow would fall for a while and stop. The sky never 
cleared the whole three days I was there. "I think I can get back here 
in March," I said as I was leaving. I gave her one last, heavily padded 
hug with my winter coat on, and kissed her on the lips. "Goodbye," 
she said. 
 - a year with a whole new sound to it - came along, and that put 
an end to my teenage years. Now I could step out into a whole new 
swamp. Then it was time for exams, and these I passed with relative 
ease. If you have nothing else to do and spend all your time going to 
lectures, it takes no special skill to get through end-of-year exams. 
Some problems arose in the dorm, though. A few guys active in one of 
the political factions kept their helmets and iron pipes hidden in their 
rooms. They had a run-in with some of the baseball-players under the 
wing of the dorm Head, as a result of which two of them were injured 
and six expelled. The aftershock of the incident was felt for a long 
time, spawning minor fights on an almost daily basis. The atmosphere 
that hung over the dorm was oppressive, and people's nerves were on 
edge. I myself was on the verge of getting knocked out by one of the 
baseball-players when Nagasawa intervened and managed to smooth 
things over. In any case, it was time for me to get out of there. 

 



Once most of my exams were out of the way, I started looking for a 
flat in earnest. After a week of searching, I came up with the right 
place way out in the suburbs of Kichijoji. The location was not exactly 
convenient, but it was a house: an independent house - a real find. 
Originally a gardener's shack or some other kind of cottage, it stood 
by itself in the corner of a good-sized plot of land, separated from the 
main house by a large stretch of neglected garden. The landlord would 
use the front gate, and I the back, which would make it possible for 
me to preserve my privacy. It had one good-sized room, a little 
kitchen and bathroom, and an unimaginably huge closet. 

It even had a veranda facing the garden. A nice old couple were 
renting the house at way below market value on condition that the 
tenant was prepared to move out the following year if their grandson 
decided to come to Tokyo. They assured me that I could live as I 
pleased there; they wouldn’t make any demands. 

Nagasawa helped me with the move. He managed to borrow a van to 
transfer my stuff, and, as promised, he gave me his fridge, TV, and 
oversize thermos flask. He might not need them any more, but for me 
they were perfect. He himself was scheduled to move out in two days, 
to a flat in the Mita neighbourhood. 

"I guess we won't be seeing each other for a long time," he said as he 
left me, "so keep well. I'm still sure we'll run across each other in 
some strange place years from now." 

"I'm already looking forward to it," I said. 

"And that time we switched girls, the funny-looking one was way 
better." 

"Right on," I said with a laugh. "But anyway, Nagasawa, take care of 
Hatsumi. Good ones like her are hard to find. And she's a lot more 
fragile than she looks." 

"Yeah, I know," he said, nodding. "That's why I was hoping you 
would take her when I was through. The two of you would make a 

 



great couple." 

"Yeah, right!" I said. 

"Just kidding," said Nagasawa. "Anyway, be happy. I get the feeling a 
lot of shit is going to come your way, but you're a stubborn bastard. 
I'm sure you'll handle it. Mind if I give you one piece of advice?" 

"Go ahead." 

"Don't feel sorry for yourself," he said. "Only arseholes do that." 

"I'll keep it in mind." I said. We shook hands and went our separate 
ways, he to his new world, and I back to my swamp. 

Three days after my move, I wrote to Naoko. I described my new 
house and said how relieved I was to be away from the idiots in the 
dorm and all their stupid brainstorms. Now I could start my new life 
with a new frame of mind. 

My window looks out on a big garden, which is used as a meeting 
place by all the neighbourhood cats. I like to stretch out on the 
veranda and watch them. I'm not sure how many of them get together, 
but this is one big gang of cats. They sunbathe in groups. I don’t think 
they're too pleased to see me living here, but once when I put out an 
old chunk of cheese a few of them crept over and nibbled it. They'll 
probably be friends of mine before too long. There's one striped tom 
cat in the bunch with half-eaten ears. It’s amazing how much he looks 
like my old dorm Head. I expect him to start raising the flag any day 
now. 

I’m kind of far from university here, but once I start my third year I 
won’t have too many morning lectures, so it shouldn't be too bad. It 
may even be better with the time to read on the train. Now all I have 
to do is find some easy work out here that I can do three or four days a 
week. Then I can get back to my springwinding life. 

I don't want to rush, but April is a good time of year to start new 
things, and I can't help feeling that the best thing for us would be to 

 



begin living together then. You could go back to university, too, if it 
worked out well. If there's a problem with us actually living together, I 
could find a flat for \ou in the neighbourhood. The most important 
thing is for us to be always near each other. It doesn't have to be 
spring, of course. If you think summer is better, that's fine by me, too. 
Just let me know what you're thinking, OK? 

I'm planning to put some extra time in at work for a while. To cover 
my moving expenses. I'm going to need a fair amount of money for 
one thing or another once I start living alone: pots and pans, dishes, 
stuff like that. I'll be free in March, though, and I definitely want to 
come to see you. What dates work best for you? I'll plan a trip to 
Kyoto then. I look forward to seeing you and hearing your answer. 

I spent the next few days buying the things I needed in the nearby 
Kichijoji shopping district and started cooking simple meals for 
myself at home. I bought some planks at a local timber yard and had 
them cut to size so I could make a desk for myself. I thought I could 
study on it and. for the time being, eat my meals there, too. I made 
some shelves and got in a good selection of spices. A white cat maybe 
six months old decided she liked me and started eating at my place. I 
called her Seagull. 

Once I had my place sorted out to some extent, I went into town and 
found a temporary job as a painter's assistant. I filled two solid weeks 
that way. The pay was good, but the work was murder, and the fumes 
made my head spin. Every day after work I'd eat at a cheap restaurant, 
wash it down with beer, go home and play with the cat, then sleep like 
a dead man. No answer came from Naoko during that time. 

I was in the thick of painting when Midori popped into my mind. I 
hadn't been in touch with her for nearly three weeks, 

I realized, and hadn’t even told her I had moved. I had mentioned to 
her that I was thinking of moving, and she had said, "Oh, really?" and 
that was the last time we had talked. 

 



I went to a phone box and dialled her number. The woman who 
answered was probably her sister. When I gave her my name, she said 
"Just a minute", but Midori never came to the phone. 

Then the sister, or whoever she was, got back on the line. "Midori 
says she's too furious to talk to you. You just moved and never said a 
thing to her, right? Just disappeared and never told her where you 
were going, right? Well, now you've got her boiling mad. And once 
she gets mad, she stays that way. Like some kind of animal." 

"Look, could you just put her on the phone? I can explain." 

"She says she doesn't want to hear any explanations." 

"Can I explain to you, then? I hate to do this to you, but could you just 
listen and tell her what I said?" 

"Not me! Do it yourself. What kind of man are you? It's your 
responsibility, so you do it, and do it right." 

It was hopeless. I thanked her and hung up. I really couldn't blame 
Midori for being angry. What with all the moving and fixing up and 
working for extra cash, I hadn't given her a second thought. Not even 
Naoko had crossed my mind the whole time. This was nothing new 
for me. Whenever I get involved in something, I shut out everything 
else. 

But then I began to think how I would have felt if the tables had been 
turned and Midori had moved somewhere without telling me where or 
getting in touch with me for three weeks. I would have been hurt - 
hurt badly, no doubt. No, we weren't lovers, but in a way we had 
opened ourselves to each other even more deeply than lovers do. The 
thought caused me a good deal of grief. What a terrible thing it is to 
wound someone you really care for - and to do it so unconsciously. 

As soon as I got home from work, I sat at my new desk and wrote to 
Midori. I told her how I felt as honestly as I could. I apologized, 
without explanations or excuses, for having been so careless and 
insensitive. I miss you, I wrote. I want to see you 
as soon as possible. I want you to see my new house. Please write to 

 



me, 1 said, and sent the letter special delivery. 

The answer never came. 

This was the beginning of one weird spring. I spent the whole holiday 
waiting for letters. I couldn't take a trip, I couldn't go home to see my 
parents, I couldn't even take a part-time job because there was no 
telling when a letter might arrive from Naoko saying she wanted me to 
come and see her on such-and-such a date. Afternoons I would spend 
in the nearby shopping district in Kichijoji, watching double bills or 
reading in a jazz cafe. I saw no one and talked to almost no one. And 
once a week I would write to Naoko. I never suggested to her that I 
was hoping for an answer. I didn’t want to pressure her in any way. I 
would tell her about my painting job, about Seagull, about the peach 
blossom in the garden, about the nice old lady who sold tofu, about 
the nasty old lady in the local restaurant, about the meals I was 
making for myself. But still, she never wrote. 

Whenever I was fed up reading or listening to records, I would work a 
little in the garden. From my landlord I borrowed a rake and broom 
and pruning shears and spent my time pulling weeds and trimming 
bushes. It didn't take much to make the garden look good. Once the 
owner invited me to join him for a cup of tea, so we sat on the veranda 
of the main house drinking green tea and munching on rice crackers, 
sharing small talk. After retirement, he had got a job with an insurance 
company, he said, but he had left that, 

too, after a couple of years, and now he was taking it easy. The house 
and land had been in the family for a long time, his children were 
grown-up and independent, and he could manage a comfortable old 
age without working. Which is why he and his wife were always 
travelling together. 

"That’s nice," I said. 

"No it’s not," he answered. "Travelling is no fun. I’d much rather be 
working." 

He let the garden grow wild, he said, because there were no decent 

 



gardeners in the area and because he had developed allergies that 
made it impossible for him to do the work himself. Cutting grass made 
him sneeze. 

When we had finished our tea, he showed me a storage shed and told 
me I could use anything I found inside, more or less by way of thanks 
for my gardening. "We don't have any use for any of this stuff," he 
said, "so feel free." 

And in fact the place was crammed with all kinds of things - an old 
wooden bath, a kids’ swimming pool, baseball bats. I found an old 
bike, a handy-sized dining table with two chairs, a mirror, and a 
guitar. "I'd like to borrow these if you don't mind," I said. 

"Feel free," he said again. 

I spent a day working on the bike: cleaning the rust off, oiling the 
bearings, pumping up the tyres, adjusting the gears, and taking it to a 
bike repair shop to have a new gear cable installed. It looked like a 
different bike by the time I had finished. I cleaned a thick layer of dust 
off the table and gave it a new coat of varnish. I replaced the strings of 
the guitar and glued a section of the body that was coming apart. I 
took a wire brush to the rust on the tuning pegs and adjusted those. It 
wasn't much of a guitar, but at least I got it to stay in tune. I hadn't had 
a guitar in my hands since school, I realized. I sat on the porch and 
picked my way through The Drifters' "Up on the Roof' as well as I 
could. I was amazed to find I still remembered most of the chords. 

Next I took a few planks of wood and made myself a square letterbox. 
I painted it red, wrote my name on it, and set it outside my door. Up 
until 3 April, the only post that found its way to my box was 
something that had been forwarded from the dorm: a notice from the 
reunion committee of my school. A class reunion was the last thing I 
wanted to have anything to do with. That was the class I had been in 
with Kizuki. I threw it in the bin. 

I found a letter in the box on the afternoon of 4 April. It said Reiko 
Ishida on the back. I made a nice, clean cut across the seal with my 

 



scissors and went out to the porch to read it. I had a feeling this was 
not going to be good news, and I was right. 

First Reiko apologized for making me wait so long for an answer. 
Naoko had been struggling to write me a letter, she said, but she could 
never seem to write one through to the end. 

I offered to send you an answer in her place, but every time I pointed 
out how wrong it was of her to keep you waiting, she insisted that it 
was far too personal a matter, that she would write to you herself, 
which is why I haven't written sooner. I'm sorry, really. I hope you can 
forgive me. 

I know you must have had a difficult month waiting for an answer, but 
believe me, the month has been just as difficult for Naoko. Please try 
to understand what she's been going through. Her condition is not 
good, I have to say in all honesty. She was trying her best to stand on 
her own two feet, but so far the results have not been good. 

Looking back, I see now that the first symptom of her problem was 
her loss of the ability to write letters. That happened around the end of 
November or beginning of December. Then she started hearing things. 
Whenever she would try to write a letter, she would hear people 
talking to her, which made it impossible for her to write. The voices 
would interfere with her attempts to choose her words. It wasn't all 
that bad until about the time of your second visit, so I didn't take it too 
seriously. For all of us here, these kinds of symptoms come in cycles, 
more or less. In her case, they got quite serious after you left. She is 
having trouble now just holding an ordinary conversation. She can't 
find the right words to speak, and that puts her into a terribly confused 
state - confused and frightened. Meanwhile, the "things" she's hearing 
are getting worse. 

We have a session every day with one of the specialists. Naoko and 
the doctor and I sit around talking and trying to find the exact part of 
her that's broken. I came up with the idea that it would be good to add 

 



you to one of our sessions if possible, and the doctor was in favour of 
it, but Naoko was against it. I can tell you exactly what her reason 
was: "I want my body to be clean of all this when I meet him." That 
was not the problem, I said to her; the problem was to get her well as 
quickly as possible, and I pushed as hard as I could, but she wouldn’t 
change her mind. 

I think I once explained to you that this is not a specialized hospital. 
We do have medical specialists here, of course, and they provide 
effective treatments, but concentrated therapy is another matter. The 
point of this place is to create an effective environment in which the 
patient can treat herself or himself, and that does not, properly 
speaking, include medical treatment. Which means that if Naoko's 
condition grows any worse, they will probably have to transfer her to 
some other hospital or medical facility or what have you. Personally, I 
would find this very painful, but we would have to do it. That isn’t to 
say that she couldn’t come back here for treatment on a kind of 
temporary "leave of absence". Or, better yet, she could even be cured 
and finish with hospitals completely. In any case, we're doing 
everything we can, and Naoko is doing everything she can. The best 
thing you can do meanwhile is hope for her recovery and keep sending 
her those letters. 

It was dated 31 March. After I had read it, I stayed on the porch and 
let my eyes wander out to the garden, full now with the freshness of 
spring. An old cherry tree stood there, its blossoms nearing the height 
of their glory. A soft breeze blew, and the light of day lent its 
strangely blurred, smoky colours to everything. Seagull wandered 
over from somewhere, and after scratching at the boards of the 
veranda for a while, she stretched out next to me and fell asleep. 

I knew I should be doing some serious thinking, but I had no idea how 
to go about it. And, to tell the truth, thinking was the last thing I 
wanted to do. The time would come soon enough when I had no 

 



choice in the matter, and when that time came I would take a good, 
long while to think things over. Not now, though. Not now. 

I spent the day staring at the garden, propped against a pillar and 
stroking Seagull. I felt completely drained. The 

afternoon deepened, twilight approached, and bluish shadows 
enveloped the garden. Seagull disappeared, but I went on staring at the 
cherry blossoms. In the spring gloom, they looked like flesh that had 
burst through the skin over festering wounds. The garden filled up 
with the sweet, heavy stench of rotting flesh. And that's when I 
thought of Naoko's flesh. Naoko's beautiful flesh lay before me in the 
darkness, countless buds bursting through her skin, green and 
trembling in an almost imperceptible breeze. Why did such a beautiful 
body have to be so ill? I wondered. Why didn't they just leave Naoko 
alone? 

I went inside and drew my curtains, but even indoors there was no 
escape from the smell of spring. It filled everything from the ground 
up. But the only thing the smell of spring brought to mind for me now 
was that putrefying stench. Shut in behind my curtains, I felt a violent 
loathing for spring. I hated what the spring had in store for me; I hated 
the dull, throbbing ache it aroused inside me. I had never hated 
anything in my life with such intensity. 

I spent three full days after that all but walking on the bottom of the 
sea. I could hardly hear what people said to me, and they had just as 
much trouble catching anything I had to say. My whole body felt 
enveloped in some kind of membrane, cutting off any direct contact 
between me and the outside world. I couldn't touch "them", and "they" 
couldn't touch me. I was utterly helpless, and as long as I remained in 
that state, "they" were unable to reach out to me. 

I sat leaning against the wall, staring up at the ceiling. When I felt 
hungry I would nibble anything within reach, drink some water, and 
when the sadness of it got to me. I'd knock myself out with whisky. I 
didn't bathe, I didn’t shave. This is how the three days went by. 

 



A letter came from Midori on 6 April. She invited me to meet her on 
campus and have lunch on the tenth when we had to enroll for 
lectures. I put off writing to you as long as I could, which makes us 
even, so let's make up. I have to admit it, I miss you. 

I read the letter again and again, four times all together, and still I 
couldn't tell what she was trying to say to me. What could it possibly 
mean? My brain was so fogged over, I couldn't find the connection 
from one sentence to the next. How would meeting her on enrolment 
day make us "even"? Why did she want to have "lunch" with me? I 
was really losing it. My mind had gone slack, like the soggy roots of a 
subterranean plant. But somehow I knew I had to snap out of it. And 
then those words of Nagasawa’s came to mind: "Don’t feel sorry for 
yourself. Only arseholes do that." 

"OK. Nagasawa. Right on," I heard myself thinking. I let out a sigh 
and got to my feet. 

I did my laundry for the first time in weeks, went to the public bath 
and shaved, cleaned my place up, shopped for food and cooked myself 
a decent meal for a change, fed the starving Seagull, drank only beer, 
and did 30 minutes of exercise. Shaving, I discovered in the mirror 
that I was becoming emaciated. My eyes were popping. I could hardly 
recognize myself. 

I went out the next morning on a longish bike ride, and after finishing 
lunch at home, I read Reiko’s letter one more time. Then thought 
seriously about what I ought to do next. The main reason I had taken 
Reiko’s letter so hard was that it had upset my optimistic belief that 
Naoko was getting better. Naoko herself had told me, "My sickness is 
a lot worse than you think: it has far deeper roots." And Reiko had 
warned me there was no telling what might happen. Still, I had seen 
Naoko twice, and had gained the impression she was on the 

mend. I had assumed that the only problem was whether she could 

 



regain the courage to return to the real world, and that if she managed 
to, the two of us could join forces and make 
a go of it. 

Reiko's letter smashed the illusory castle that I had built on that fragile 
hypothesis, leaving only a flattened surface devoid of feeling. I would 
have to do something to regain my footing. It would probably take a 
long time for Naoko to recover. And even then, she would no doubt be 
more debilitated and would have lost even more of her self confidence 
than ever. I would have to adapt myself to this new situation. As 
strong as I might become, though, it would not solve all the problems. 
I knew that much. But there was nothing else I could do: just keep my 
own spirits up and wait for her to recover. 

Hey, there, Kizuki, I thought. Unlike you. I've chosen to live - and to 
live the best I know how. Sure, it was hard for you. What the hell, it's 
hard for me. Really hard. And all because you killed yourself and left 
Naoko behind. But that's something I will never do. I will never, ever, 
turn my back on her. First of all, because I love her, and because I'm 
stronger than she is. And I'm just going to keep on getting stronger. 
I'm going to mature. I'm going to be an adult. Because that's what I 
have to do. I always used to think I’d like to stay 17 or 18 if I could. 
But not any more. I'm not a teenager any more. I've got a sense of 
responsibility now. I'm not the same person I was when we used to 
hang out together. I'm 20 now. And I have to pay the price to go on 
living. 

"Shit, Watanabe, what happened to you?" Midori asked. "You're all 
skin and bones!" 

"That bad, huh?" 

"Too much you-know-what with that married girlfriend of yours, I 
bet." 

I smiled and shook my head. "I haven't slept with a girl since the 

 



beginning of October." 

"Whew! That can't be true. We're talking six months here!" "You 
heard me." 

"So how did you lose so much weight?" "By growing up," I said. 

Midori put her hands on my shoulders and looked me in the eye with a 
twisted scowl that soon turned into a sweet smile. "It's true," she said. 
"Something's kind of different. You've changed." 

"I told you, I grew up. I'm an adult now." 

"You're fantastic, the way your brain works," she said as though 
genuinely impressed. "Let's eat. I'm starving." 

We went to a little restaurant behind the literature department. I 
ordered the lunch special and she did the same. "Hey, Watanabe, are 
you mad at me?" "What for?" 

"For not answering you, just to get even. Do you think I shouldn’t 
have done that? I mean, you apologized and everything." 

"Yeah, but it was my fault to begin with. That's just how it goes." 

"My sister says I shouldn't have done it. That it was too unforgiving, 
too childish." 

"Yeah, but it made you feel better, didn't it, getting even like that?" 
"Uh-huh." 

"OK. then, that's that." 

"You are forgiving, aren't you?" Midori said. "But tell me the truth, 
Watanabe, you haven't had sex for six months?" 

"Not once." 

"So, that time you put me to bed, you must have really wanted it bad." 
"Yeah, I guess I did." 

"But you didn't do it, did you?" 

"Look, you're the best friend I’ve got now," I said. "I don't want to lose 
you." 

"You know, if you had tried to force yourself on me that time, I 
wouldn't have been able to resist, I was so exhausted." 

"But I was too big and hard," I said. 

 



Midori smiled and touched my wrist. "A little before that, I decided I 
was going to believe in you. A hundred per cent. That's how I 
managed to sleep like that with total peace of mind. I knew I'd be all 
right. I'd be safe with you there. And I did sleep like a log, didn’t I?" 
"You sure did." 

"On the other hand, if you were to say to me, "Hey, Midori, let's do it. 
Then everything'll be great,' I’d probably do it with you. Now, don't 
think I'm trying to seduce you or tease you. I'm just telling you what's 
on my mind, with total honesty." 

"I know, I know." 

While we ate lunch, we showed each other our enrolment cards and 
found that we had enrolled for two of the same courses. So I’d be 
seeing her twice a week at least. With that out of the way, Midori told 
me about her living arrangements. For a while, neither she nor her 
sister could get used to living in a flat - because it was too easy, she 
said. They had always been used to running around like mad every 
day, taking care of sick people, helping out at the bookshop, and one 
thing or another. 

"We're finally getting used to it, though," she said. "This is the way we 
should have been living all along - not having to worry about anyone 
else's needs, just stretching out any way we felt like it. It made us both 
nervous at first, as if our bodies were floating a few inches off the 
ground. It didn’t seem real, like real life couldn’t actually be like that. 
We were both tense, as though everything was about to be tipped 
upside down any minute." 

"A couple of worriers," I said with a smile. 

"Well, it's just that life has been so cruel to us until now," 

Midori said. "But that's OK. We're going to get back every thing it 
owes us." 

"I bet you are," I said, "knowing you. But tell me, what's your sister 
doing these days?" 

"A friend of hers opened this swanky accessory shop a little while 

 



ago. My sister helps out there three times a week. Otherwise, she's 
studying cookery, going on dates with her fiance, going to the cinema, 
vegging out, and just enjoying life. 

Midori then asked about my new life. I gave her a description of the 
layout of the house, and the big garden and Seagull the cat, and my 
landlord. 

"Are you enjoying yourself?" she asked. "Pretty much," I said. 

"Could have fooled me," said Midori. 

"Yeah, and it's springtime, too," I said. 

"And you're wearing that cool pullover your girlfriend knitted for 
you." 

With a sudden shock I glanced down at my wine-coloured jumper. 
"How did you know?" 

"You're as honest as they come," said Midori. "I'm guessing, of 
course! Anyway, what's wrong with you?" 

"I don't know. I'm trying to whip up a little enthusiasm." "Just 
remember, life is a box of chocolates." 

I shook try head a few times and looked at her. "Maybe I'm not so 
smart, but sometimes I don't know what on earth you're talking 
about." 

"You know, they've got these chocolate assortments, and you like 
some but you don't like others? And you eat all the ones you like, and 
the only ones left are the ones you don't like as much? I always think 
about that when something painful comes up. "Now I just have to 
polish these off, and everything'll be OK.' Life is a box of chocolates." 

"I suppose you could call it a philosophy." 

"It's true, though. I've learned it from experience." 

We were drinking our coffee when two girls came in. Midori seemed 
to know them from university. The three of them compared enrolment 
cards and talked about a million different things: "What kind of mark 

 



did you get in German?" "So-and-so got hurt in the campus riots." 
"Great shoes, where did you buy them?" I half-listened, but it felt as 
though their comments were coming from the other side of the world. 
I sipped my coffee and watched the scene passing by the shop 
window. It was a typical university springtime scene as the new year 
was getting under way: a haze hanging in the sky, the cherry trees 
blooming, the new students (you could tell at a glance) carrying 
armloads of new books. I felt myself difting off a little and thought 
about Naoko, unable to return to her studies again this year. A small 
glass full of anemones stood by the window. 

When the other two went back to their table, Midori and I left to walk 
around the neighbourhood. We visited a few second-hand bookshops, 
bought some books, went to another cafe for another cup, played some 
pinball at an arcade, and sat on a park bench, talking - or, rather, 
Midori talked while I merely grunted in response. When she said she 
was thirsty, I ran over to a newsagent's and bought us two Cokes. I 
came back to find her scribbling away with her ballpoint pen on some 
ruled paper. 

"What's that?" I asked. 

"Nothing," she said. 

"I have to go," she announced at 3.30. "I'm supposed to meet my sister 
at the Ginza." 

We walked to the subway station and went off in different directions. 
As she left, Midori stuffed the piece of paper, now folded in four, into 
my pocket. "Read this when you get home," she said. I read it on the 
train. 

I'm writing this letter to you while you're off buying drinks. This is the 
first time in my life I've ever written a letter to somebody sitting next 
to me on a bench, but I feel it's the only way I can get through to you. 
I mean, you're hardly listening to anything I say. Am I right? 

Do jou realize you did something terrible to me today? You never 

 



even noticed that my hairstyle had changed, did you? I've been 
working on it forever, trying to grow it out, and finally, at the end of 
last week, I managed to get it into a style you could actually call 
girlish, but you never even noticed. It was looking pretty good, so I 
thought I'd give you a little shock when you saw me for the first time 
after so long, but it didn’t even register with you. Don't you think that's 
awful? I bet you can't even remember what I was wearing today. Hey, 
I'm a girl! So what if you've got something on your mind? You can 
spare me one decent look! All you had to say was "Cute hair", and I 
would have been able to forgive you for being sunk in a million 
thoughts, but no! 

Which is why I'm going to tell you a lie. It's not true that I have to 
meet my sister at the Ginza. I was planning to spend the night at your 
place. I even brought my pyjamas with me. It's true. I've got my 
pyjamas and a toothbrush in my bag. I'm such an idiot! I mean, you 
never even invited me over to see your new place. Oh well, what the 
hell, you obviously want to be alone, so I'll leave you alone. Go ahead 
and think away to your heart's content! 

But don't get me wrong. I'm not totally mad at you. I'm just sad. You 
were so nice to me when I was having my problems, but now that 
you're having yours, it seems there's not a thing I can do for you. 
You're all locked up in that little world of yours, and when I try 
knocking on the door, you just sort of look up for a second and go 
right back inside. 

So now I see you coming back with our drinks - walking and thinking. 
I was hoping you’d trip, but you didn't. Now you're sitting next to me 
drinking your Coke. I was holding out one last hope that you’d notice 
and say "Hey, your hair's changed!" but no. If you had, I would have 
tom up this letter and said: "Let's go to your place. I'll make you a nice 
dinner. And afterwards we can go to bed and cuddle." But you're 
about as sensitive as a steel plate. Goodbye. 

PS. Please don't talk to me next time we meet. 

 



I rang Midori's flat from the station when I got off the train in 
Kichijoji, but there was no answer. With nothing better to do, I 
ambled around the neighbourhood looking for some part-time work I 
could take after lectures began. I would be free all day Saturday and 
Sunday and could work after five o'clock on Mondays, Wednesdays 
and Thursdays; but finding a job that fitted my particular schedule was 
no easy matter. I gave up and went home. When I went out to buy 
groceries for dinner, I tried Midori's place again. Her sister told me 
that Midori hadn't come home yet and that she had no idea when she'd 
be back. I thanked her and hung up. 

After eating, I tried to write to Midori, but I gave up after several false 
starts and wrote to Naoko instead. 

Spring was here, I said, and the new university year was starting. I 
told her I missed her, that I had been hoping, one way or another, to be 
able to meet her and talk. In any case, 

I wrote. I've decided to make myself strong. As far as I can tell, that's 
all I can do. 

There's one other thing. Maybe it's just to do with me, and you may 
not care about this one way or another, but I'm not sleeping with 
anybody any more. It's because I don't want to forget the last time you 
touched me. It meant a lot more to me than you might think. I think 
about it all of the time. 

I put the letter in an envelope, stuck on a stamp, and sat at my desk a 
long while staring at it. It was a much shorter letter than usual, but I 
had the feeling that Naoko might understand me better that way. I 
poured myself an inch-and-a-half of whisky, drank it in two swallows, 
and went to sleep. 

The next day I found a job near Kichijoji Station that I could do on 

 



Saturdays and Sundays: waiting on tables at a smallish Italian 
restaurant. The conditions were pretty poor, but travel 
and lunch expenses were included. And whenever somebody on the 
late shift took the day off on a Monday, Wednesday or Thursday 
(which happened often) I could take their place. This was perfect for 
me. The manager said they would raise my pay when I had stayed for 
three months, and they wanted me to start that Saturday. He was a 
much more decent guy than the idiot who ran the record shop in 
Shinjuku. 

I tried phoning Midori's flat again, and again her sister answered. 
Midori hadn't come back since yesterday, she said, sounding tired, and 
now she herself was beginning to worry: did I have any idea where 
she might have gone? All I knew was that Midori had her pyjamas and 
a toothbrush in her bag. 

I saw Midori at the lecture on Wednesday. She was wearing a deep 
green pullover and the dark sunglasses she had often worn that 
summer. She was seated in the last row, talking with a thin girl with 
glasses I had seen once before. I approached her and said I’d like to 
talk afterwards. The girl with glasses looked at me first, and then 
Midori looked at me. Her hairstyle was, in fact, somewhat more 
feminine than it had been before: more mature. 

"I have to meet someone," she said, cocking her head slightly. 

"I won't take up much of your time," I said. "Five minutes." 

Midori removed her sunglasses and narrowed her eyes. She might just 
as well have been looking at a crumbling, abandoned house some 
hundred yards in the distance. 

"I don’t want to talk to you. Sorry," she said. 

The girl with glasses looked at me with eyes that said: She says she 
doesn't want to talk to you. Sorry. 

I sat at the right end of the front row for the lecture (an overview of 

 



the works of Tennessee Williams and their place in American 
literature), and when it was over, I did a long count to three and turned 
around. Midori was gone. 

April was too lonely a month to spend all alone. In April, everyone 
around me looked happy. People would throw off their coats and 
enjoy each other's company in the sunshine - talking, playing catch, 
holding hands. But I was always by myself. Naoko, Midori, 
Nagasawa: all of them had gone away from where I stood. Now I had 
no one to say "Good morning" to or "Have a nice day". I even missed 
Storm Trooper. I spent the whole month with this hopeless sense of 
isolation. I tried to speak to Midori a few times, but the answer I got 
from her was always the same: "I don’t want to talk to you now" - and 
I knew from the tone of her voice that she meant it. She was always 
with the girl with glasses, or else I saw her with a tall, short-haired 
guy. He had these incredibly long legs and always wore white 
basketball shoes. 

April ended and May came along, but May was even worse than 
April. In the deepening spring of May, I had no choice but to 
recognize the trembling of my heart. It usually happened as the sun 
was going down. In the pale evening gloom, when the soft fragrance 
of magnolias hung in the air, my heart would swell without warning, 
and tremble, and lurch with a stab of pain. I would try clamping my 
eyes shut and gritting my teeth, and wait for it to pass. And it would 
pass - but slowly, taking its own time, and leaving a dull ache in its 
path. 

At those times I would write to Naoko. In my letters to her, I would 
describe only things that were touching or pleasant or beautiful: the 
fragrance of grasses, the caress of a spring breeze, the light of the 
moon, a film I’d seen, a song I liked, a book that had moved me. I 
myself would be comforted by 

letters like this when I would reread what I had written. And I would 
feel that the world I lived in was a wonderful one. I wrote any number 

 



of letters like this, but from Naoko or Reiko I heard nothing. 

At the restaurant where I worked I got to know another student my 
age named Itoh. It took quite a while before this gentle, quiet student 
from the oil-painting department of an art college would engage me in 
conversation, but eventually we started going to a nearby bar after 
work and talking about all kinds of things. He also liked to read and to 
listen to music, so we'd usually talk about books and records we liked. 
He was a slim, good-looking guy with much shorter hair and far 
cleaner clothes than the typical art student. He never had a lot to say, 
but he had his definite tastes and opinions. He liked French novels, 
especially those of Georges Bataille and Boris Vian. For music, he 
preferred Mozart and Ravel. And, like me, he was looking for a friend 
with whom he could talk about such things. 

Itoh once invited me to his flat. It was not quite as hard to get to as 
mine: a strange, one-floored house behind Inokashira Park. His room 
was stuffed with painting supplies and canvases. I asked to see his 
work, but he said he was too embarrassed to show me anything. We 
drank some Chivas Regal that he had quietly removed from his 
father's place, grilled some smelts on his charcoal stove, and listened 
to Robert Casadesus playing a Mozart piano concerto. 

Itoh was from Nagasaki. He had a girlfriend he would sleep with 
whenever he went home, he said, but things weren't going too well 
with her lately. 

"You know what girls are like," he said. "They turn 20 or 21 and all of 
a sudden they start having these concrete ideas. They get super- 
realistic. And when that happens, everything that seemed so sweet and 
loveable about them begins to look ordinary and depressing. Now 
when I see her, usually after we do it, she starts asking me, "What are 
you going to do after you graduate?"' 

"Well, what are you going to do after you graduate?" I asked him. 
Munching on a mouthful of smelt, he shook his head. "What can I do? 
I'm in oil painting! Start worrying about stuff like that, and nobody's 

 



going to study oil painting! You don't do it to feed yourself. So she's 
like, "Why don’t you come back to Nagasaki and become an art 
teacher?' She's planning to be an English teacher." 

"You're not so crazy about her any more, are you?" 

"That just about sums it up," Itoh admitted. "And who on earth wants 
to be an art teacher? I'm not gonna spend my whole fuckin' life 
teaching teenaged monkeys how to draw!" 

"That's beside the point," I said. "Don’t you think you ought to break 
up with her? For both your sakes." 

"Sure I do. But I don't know how to say it to her. She's planning to 
spend her life with me. How the hell can I say, "Hey, we ought to split 
up. I don't like you any more'?" 

We drank our Chivas straight, without ice, and when we ran out of 
smelts we cut up some cucumbers and celery and dipped them in 
miso. When my teeth crunched down on my cucumber slices, I 
thought of Midori's father, which reminded me how flat and tasteless 
my life had become without Midori and this put me in a foul mood. 
Without my being aware of it, she had become a huge presence inside 
me. 

"Got a girlfriend ?" asked Itoh. 

"Yeah," I said, then, after a pause added, "but I can't be with her at the 
moment." 

"But you understand each other's feelings, right?" 

"I like to think so. Otherwise, what's the point?" I said with a chuckle. 
Itoh talked in hushed tones about the greatness of Mozart. He knew 
Mozart inside out, the way a country boy knows his mountain trails. 
His father loved the music and had exposed him to it ever since he 
was tiny. I didn’t know so much about classical music, but listening to 
this Mozart concerto with Itoh's smart and heartfelt commentary 
("There - that part," "How about that?"), I felt myself calming down 
for the first time in ages. We stared at the crescent moon hanging over 
Inokashira Park and drank our Chivas Regal to the last drop. Fantastic 

 



whisky. 

Itoh said I could spend the night there, but I told him I had to do 
something, thanked him for the whisky and left his flat before nine. 
On the way back to my place I called Midori from a phone box. Much 
to my surprise she actually answered. 

"Sorry," she said, "but I don't want to talk to you right now." 

"I know, I know. But I don't want our relationship to end like this. 
You're one of the very few friends I have, and it hurts not being able 
to see you. When am I going to be able to talk to you? I want you to 
tell me that much, at least." 

"When I feel like talking to you," she said. 

"How are you?" I asked. 

"Fine," she said, and hung up. 

A letter came from Reiko in the middle of May. 

Thanks for writing so often. Naoko enjoys your letters. And so do I. 
You don't mind if I read them, do you? 

Sorry I haven't been able to answer for such a long time. To tell you 
the truth. I’ve been feeling a bit exhausted, and there hasn't been much 
good news to report. Naoko’s not doing well. Her mother came from 
Kobe the other day. The four of us - she and Naoko and the doctor and 
I - had a good, long talk and we reached the conclusion that Naoko 
should move to a real hospital for a while for some intensive treatment 
and then maybe come back here depending on the results. Naoko says 
she’d like to stay here if possible and make herself well, and I know I 
am going to miss her and worry about her, but the fact is that it’s 
getting harder and harder to keep her under control here. She’s fine 
most of the time, but sometimes her emotions become extremely 
unstable, and when that happens we can’t take our eyes off her. 
There’s no telling what she would do. When she has those intense 
episodes of hearing voices, she shuts down completely and burrows 

 



inside herself. 

Which is why I myself agree that the best thing for Naoko would be 
for her to receive therapy at a proper institution for a while. I hate to 
say it, but it's all we can do. As I told you once before, patience is the 
most important thing. We have to go on unravelling the jumbled 
threads one at a time, without losing hope. No matter how hopeless 
her condition may appear to be, we are bound to find that one loose 
thread sooner or later. If you're in pitch blackness, all you can do is sit 
tight until your eyes get used to the dark. 

Naoko should have moved to that other hospital by the time you 
receive this. I'm sorry I waited to tell you until the decisions had been 
made, but it happened very quickly. The new hospital is a really good 
one, 

with good doctors. I'll write the address below: please write to Naoko 
there. They will be keeping me informed of her progress, too, so I will 
let you know what I hear. I hope it will be good news. I know this is 
going to be hard for you, but keep your hopes up. And even though 
Naoko is not here any more, please write to me once in a while. 
Goodbye. 

I wrote a huge number of letters that spring: one a week to Naoko, 
several to Reiko, and several more to Midori. I wrote letters in the 
lecture hall, I wrote letters at my desk at home with Seagull on my lap, 
I wrote letters at empty tables during my breaks at the Italian 
restaurant. It was as if I were writing letters to hold together the pieces 
of my crumbling life. 

To Midori I wrote: April and May were painful, lonely months for me 
because I couldn't talk to you. I never knew that spring could be so 
painful and lonely. Better to have three Februaries than a spring like 
this. I know it's too late to be saying this, but your new hairstyle looks 
great on you. Really cute. I'm working at an Italian restaurant now, 
and the cook taught me a great way to make spaghetti. I'd like to make 

 



it for you soon. 


I went to the university every day, worked in the restaurant two or 
three times a week, talked with Itoh about books and music, read a 
few Boris Vian novels he lent me, wrote letters, played with Seagull, 
made spaghetti, worked in the garden, masturbated thinking of Naoko, 
and saw lots of films. 

It was almost the middle of June by the time Midori started talking to 
me. We hadn't said a word to each other for two months. After the end 
of one lecture, she sat down next to me, propped her chin in her hand, 
and sat there, saying nothing. 

Beyond the window, it was raining - a really rainy-season rain, 
pouring straight down without any wind, soaking every single thing 
beneath. Long after the other students had filed out of the classroom, 
Midori went on sitting next to me without a word. Then she took a 
Marlboro from the pocket of her jeans jacket, put it between her lips, 
and handed me her matches. I struck a match and lit her cigarette. 
Midori pursed her lips and blew a gentle cloud of tobacco in my face. 
"Like my hairstyle?" she asked. 

"It's great." 

"How great?" 

"Great enough to knock down all the trees in all the forests of the 
world." 

"You really think so?" 

"I really think so." 

She kept her eyes on mine for a while, then held her right hand out to 
me. I took it. She looked even more relieved than I felt. She tapped 
her ashes onto the floor and rose to her feet. 

"Let’s eat. I’m starving," she said. 

"Where do you want to go?" I asked. 

"To the restaurant of the Takashimaya department store in 

 



Nihonbashi." 

"Why there of all places?" 

"I like to go there sometimes, that's all." 

And so we took the subway to Nihonbashi. The place was practically 
empty, maybe because it had been raining all morning. The smell of 
rain filled the big, cavernous department store, and all the employees 
had that what-do-we-do-now? kind of look. Midori and I went to the 
basement restaurant and, after a close inspection of the plastic food in 
the window, both decided to have an old-fashioned cold lunch 
assortment with rice and pickles and grilled fish and 
tempura and teriyaki chicken. Inside, it was far from crowded despite 
it being midday. 

"God, how long has it been since I last had lunch in a department- 
store restaurant?" I wondered aloud, drinking green tea from one of 
those slick, white cups you only get in a department-store restaurant. 

"I like to do stuff like this," said Midori. "I don't know, it makes me 
feel like I'm doing something special. Probably reminds me of when I 
was a kid. My parents almost never took me to department stores." 

"And I get the sneaking suspicion that's all mine ever did. My mother 
was crazy about them." 

"Lucky you!" 

"What are you talking about? I don't particularly like going to 
department stores." 

"No, I mean, you were lucky they cared enough about you to take you 
places.'-" 

"Well, I was an only child," I said. 

"When I was little I used to dream about going to a department-store 
restaurant all by myself when I grew up and eating anything I liked. 
But what an empty dream! What's the fun of cramming your mouth 
full of rice all alone in a place like this? The food's not all that great, 
and it's just big and crowded and stuffy and noisy. Still, every once in 
a while I think about coming here." 

 



"I've been really lonely these past two months," I said. 

"Yeah, I know. You told me in your letters," Midori said, her voice 
flat. "Anyway, let's eat. That's all I can think about now." 

We finished all the little fried and grilled and pickled items in the 
separate compartments of our fancy lacquered half-moon lunch boxes, 
drank our clear soup from lacquered bowls, and our green tea from 
those white cups. Midori followed lunch with a cigarette. When she 
had finished smoking, she stood up without a word and took her 
umbrella. I also stood up and took mine. 

"Where do you want to go now?" I asked. 

"The roof, of course. That's the next stop when you've had lunch in a 
department-store restaurant." 

There was no one on the roof in the rain, no clerk in the pet 
department, and the shutters were closed in the kiosks and the 
children's rides ticket booth. We opened our umbrellas and wandered 
among the soaking wet wooden horses and garden chairs and stalls. It 
seemed incredible to me that there could be anywhere so devoid of 
people in the middle of Tokyo. Midori said she wanted to look 
through a telescope, so I put in a coin and held her umbrella over her 
while she squinted through the eyepiece. 

In one corner of the roof there was a covered game area with a row of 
children's rides. Midori and I sat next to each other on some kind of 
platform and looked at the rain. 

"So talk," Midori said. "You've got something you want to say to me, 
I know." 

"I'm not trying to make excuses," I said, "but I was really depressed 
that time. My brain was all fogged over. Nothing was registering with 
me. But one thing became crystal clear to me when I couldn’t see you 
any more. I realized that the only way I had been able to survive until 
then was having you in my life. When I lost you, the pain and 
loneliness really got to me." 

"Don't you have any idea how painful and lonely it's been for me 

 



without you these past two months?" 

This took me completely off guard. "No," I said. "It never occurred to 
me. I thought you were angry with me and didn't want to see me." 

"How can you be such an idiot? Of course I wanted to see you! I told 
you how much I like you! When I like somebody I really like them. It 
doesn't turn on and off for me just like that. Don’t you realize at least 
that much about me?" 

"Well, sure, but - " 

"That's why I was so mad at you! I wanted to give you a good kick up 
the arse. I mean, we hadn't seen each other that whole time, and you 
were so spaced out thinking about this other girl you didn't even look 
at me! How could I not get angry at you? But apart from all that, I had 
been feeling for a long time that it would be better for me if I kept 
away from you for a while. To get things clear in my head." 

"What kind of things?" 

"Our relationship, of course. It was getting to the point where I 
enjoyed being with you far more than being with him, I mean, don’t 
you think there's something weird about that? And difficult? Of course 
I still like him. He's a little self-centred and narrow-minded and kind 
of a fascist, but he's got a lot of good points, and he's the first man I 
ever felt serious about. But you, well, you're special to me. When I'm 
with you I feel something is just right. I believe in you. I like you. I 
don't want to let you go. I was getting more and more confused, so I 
went to him and asked him what I should do. He told me to stop 
seeing you. He said if I was going to see you, I should break up with 
him." 

"So what did you do?" 

"I broke up with him. Just like that." Midori put a Marlboro in her 
mouth, shielded it with her hand as she lit up, and inhaled. 

"Why?" 

""Why?'!" she screamed. "Are you crazy? You know the English 
subjunctive, you understand trigonometry, you can read Marx, and 

 



you don't know the answer to something as simple as that? Why do 
you even have to ask? Why do you have to make a girl say something 
like this? I like you more than I like him, that's all. I wish I had fallen 
in love with somebody a little more handsome, of course. But I didn't. 
I fell in love with you!" 

I tried to speak, but I felt the words catching in my throat. 

Midori threw her cigarette into a puddle. "Will you please get that 
look off your face? You're gonna make me cry. Don't worry, I know 
you're in love with somebody else. I'm not expecting anything from 
you. But the least you can do is give me a hug. These have been two 
tough months for me." 

I put up my umbrella, and we went behind the game area and held 
each other close. Our bodies strained against each other, and our lips 
met. The smell of the rain clung to her hair and her jeans jacket. Girls' 
bodies were so soft and warm! I could feel her breasts pressing against 
my chest through our clothing. How long had it been since my last 
physical contact with another human being? 

"The day I last saw you, that night I talked to him, and we broke up," 
Midori said. 

"I love you," I said to her. "From the bottom of my heart. I don't ever 
want to let you go again. But there's nothing I can do. I can't make a 
move." 

"Because of her?" 

I nodded. 

"Tell me, have you slept with her?" 

"Once. A year ago." 

"And you haven't seen her since then?" 

"I have seen her: twice. But we didn’t do anything." "Why not? 
Doesn't she love you?" 

"That's hard to say," I said. "It's really complicated. And 

mixed up. And it's been going on for such a long time, I don't know 

what's what any more. And neither does she. All I know is, I have a 

 



sort of responsibility in all this as a human being, and I can't just turn 
my back on it. At least, that's how I feel about it now. Even if she isn't 
in love with me." 

"Let me just tell you this, Watanabe," said Midori, pressing her cheek 
against my neck. "I'm a real, live girl, with real, live blood gushing 
through my veins. You're holding me in your arms and I'm telling you 
that I love you. I'm ready to do anything you tell me to do. I may be a 
little bit mad, but I'm a good girl, and honest, and I work hard. I'm 
kind of cute, I have nice boobs. I'm a good cook, and my father left me 
a trust fund. I mean. I'm a real bargain, don't you think? If you don't 
take me. I'll end up going somewhere else." 

"I need time," I said. "I need time to think and sort things out, and 
make some decisions. I'm sorry, but that's all I can say at this point." 
"Yeah, but you do love me from the bottom of your heart, right? And 
you never want to let me go again, right?" 

"I said it and I meant it." 

Midori pulled away from me with a smile on her face. "OK, I’ll wait! I 
believe in you," she said. "But when you take me, you take only me. 
And when you hold me in your arms, you think only about me. Is that 
clear?" 

"I understand exactly." 

"I don’t care what you do to me, but I don’t want you to hurt me. I’ve 
had enough hurt already in my life. More than enough. Now I want to 
be happy." 

I drew her close and kissed her on the mouth. 

"Drop the damn umbrella and wrap both your arms around me - hard!" 
she said. 

"But we’ll get soaking wet!" 

"So what? I want you to stop thinking and hold me tight! I’ve been 
waiting two whole months for this!" 

I set down the umbrella and held her close in the rain. The dull rush of 
tyres on the highway enveloped us like a fog. The rain fell without a 

 



break, without a sound, soaking her hair and mine, running like tears 
down our cheeks, down to her denim jacket and my yellow nylon 
windcheater, spreading in dark stains. 

"How about going back under the roof?" I said. 

"Come to my place. There's nobody home now. We'll both catch colds 
like this." 

"It’s true." 

"It's as if we've just swum across a river," Midori said, smiling. "What 
a great feeling!" 

We bought a good-sized towel in the linen department and took turns 
going into the bathroom to dry our hair. Then we took the subway, 
with the necessary top-up tickets, to her flat in Myogadani. She let me 
shower first and then she showered. Lending me a bathrobe to wear 
while my clothes dried, Midori changed into a polo shirt and skirt. We 
sat at the kitchen table drinking coffee. 

"Tell me about yourself," Midori said. 

"What about me?" 

"Hmm, I don't know, what do you hate?" "Chicken and VD and 
barbers who talk too much." "What else?" 

"Lonely April nights and lacy telephone covers." "What else?" 

I shook my head. "I can't think of anything else." 

"My boyfriend - which is to say, my ex-boyfriend - had all kinds of 
things he hated. Like when I wore too-short skirts, or when I smoked, 
or how I got drunk too quickly, or said disgusting things, or criticized 
his friends. So if there's anything about me you don't like, just tell me, 
and I'll fix it if I can." 

"I can't think of anything," I said after giving it some thought. "There's 
nothing." 

"Really?" 

"I like everything you wear, and I like what you do and say and how 
you walk and how you get drunk. Everything." 

"You mean I'm really OK just the way I am?" 

 



"I don't know how you could change, so you must be fine the way you 
are." 

"How much do you love me?" Midori asked. 

"Enough to melt all the tigers in the world to butter," I said. "Far out," 
she said with a hint of satisfaction. "Will you hold me again?" 

We got into her bed and held each other, kissing as the sound of the 
rain filled our ears. Then we talked about everything from the 
formation of the universe to our preferences in the hardness of boiled 
eggs. 

"I wonder what ants do on rainy days?" Midori asked. 

"No idea," I said. "They're hard workers, so they probably spend the 
day cleaning house or stock-taking." 

"If they work so hard, why don’t they evolve? They've been the same 
for ever." 

"I don't know," I said. "Maybe their body structure isn't suited to 
evolving - compared with monkeys, say." 

"Hey, Watanabe, there's a lot of stuff you don’t know. I thought you 
knew everything." 

"It's a big world out there," I said. 

"High mountains, deep oceans," Midori said. She put her hand inside 
my bathrobe and took hold of my erection. Then, with a gulp, she 
said. "Hey, Watanabe, joking aside, this isn’t gonna work. I could 
never get this big, hard thing inside me. No way." 

"You're kidding," I said with a sigh. 

"Yup," she said, giggling. "Don't worry. It'll be just fine. I'm sure it'll 
fit. Er, mind if I have a look?" 

"Feel free." 

Midori burrowed under the covers and groped me all over down there, 
stretching the skin of my penis, weighing my testicles in the palm of 
her hand. Then she poked her head out and sighed. "I love it!" she 
said. "No flattery intended! I really love it!" 

"Thank you," I said with simple gratitude. 

 



"But really, Watanabe, you don't want to do it with me, do you - until 
you get all that business straightened out?" 

"There's no way I don't want to do it with you," I said. "I'm going 
crazy I want to do it so bad. But it just wouldn’t be right." 

"You're so damned stubborn! If I were you. I'd just do it - then think 
about it afterwards." 

"You would?" 

"Only kidding," Midori said in a tiny voice. "I probably wouldn't do it, 
either, if I were you. And that’s what I love about you. That’s what I 
really really love about you." 

"How much do you love me?" I asked, but she didn't answer. Instead, 
she pressed against me, put her lips on my nipple and began to move 
the hand that was wrapped around my penis. The first thing that 
occurred to me was how different it was to the way Naoko moved her 
hand. Both were gentle and wonderful, but something was different 
about the way they did it, and so it felt like a totally different 
experience. 

"Hey, Watanabe, I bet you're thinking about that other girl." 

"Not true," I lied. 

"Really?" 

"Really." 

"Because I would really hate that." 

"I can't think about anybody else," I said. 

"Want to touch my breasts, or down there?" Midori asked. "Oh wow. 
I'd love to, but I’d better not. If we do all those 
things at once, it'll be too much for me." 

Midori nodded and rustled around under the covers, pulling 

her panties off and holding them against the tip of my penis. "You can 

come on these," she said. "But it'll make a mess of them." 

"Stop it, will you? You're gonna make me cry," said Midori, a if on 
the verge of tears. "All I have to do is wash them. So don't hold back, 
just let yourself come all you want. If you're worried about my 

 



panties, buy me a new pair. Or are they going to keep you from 
coming because they're mine?" 

"No way," I said. "Go on then, let go." 

When I was through, Midori inspected my semen. "Wow, that's a huge 
amount!" 

"Too much?" 

"Nah, it's OK, silly. Come all you want," she said with a smile. Then 
she kissed me. 

In the evening, Midori did some shopping in the neighbourhood and 
made dinner. We ate tempura and rice with green peas at the kitchen 
table, and washed it all down with beer. 

"Eat a lot and make lots of semen," Midori said. "Then I'll be nice and 
help you get rid of it." 

"Thanks very much," I said. 

"I know all sorts of ways to do it. I learned from the women's 
magazines when we had the bookshop. Once they had this special 
edition all about how to take care of your husband so he won't cheat 
on you while you're pregnant and can't have sex. There's tons of ways. 
Wanna try 'em?" 

"I can hardly wait," I said. 

After saying goodbye to Midori, I bought a newspaper at the station, 
but when I opened it on the train, I realized I had absolutely no desire 
to read a paper and in fact couldn't understand what it said. All I could 
do was glare at the incomprehensible page of print and wonder what 
was going to happen to me from now on, and how the things around 
me would be changing. I felt as if the world was pulsating every now 
and then. I sighed deeply and closed my eyes. As regards what I had 
done that day, I felt not the slightest regret; I knew for certain that if I 
had to do it all over again, I would live this day in exactly the same 
way. I would hold Midori tight on the roof in the rain; I would get 
soaking wet with her; and I would let her fingers bring me to climax in 

 



her bed. I had no doubts about those things. I loved Midori, and I was 
happy that she had come back to me. The two of us could make it, that 
was certain. As Midori herself had said, she was a real, live girl with 
blood in her veins, and she was putting her warm body in my arms. It 
had been all I could do to suppress the intense desire I had to strip her 
naked, throw open her body, and sink myself in her warmth. There 
was no way I could have made myself stop her once she was holding 
my penis and moving her hand. I wanted her to do it, she wanted to do 
it, and we were in love. Who could have stopped such a thing? It was 
true: I loved Midori. And I had probably known as much for a while. I 
had just been avoiding the conclusion for a very long time. 

The problem was that I could never explain these developments to 
Naoko. It would have been hard enough at any point, but with Naoko 
in her present condition, there was no way I could tell her I had fallen 
in love with another girl. And besides, I still loved Naoko. As twisted 
as that love might be, I did love her. Somewhere inside me there was 
still preserved a broad, open space, untouched, for Naoko and no one 
else. 

One thing I could do was write a letter to Reiko that confessed 
everything with total honesty. At home, I sat on the veranda, watching 
the rain pour down on the garden at night, and assembling phrases in 
my head. Then I went to my desk and wrote the letter. It is almost 
unbearable to me that I now have to write a letter like this to you, I 
began. I summarized my relationship with Midori and explained what 
had happened that day. 

I have always loved Naoko, and I still love her. But there is a decisive 
finality to what exists between Midori and me. It has an irresistible 
power that is bound to sweep me into the future. What I feel for 
Naoko is a tremendously quiet and gentle and transparent love, but 
what I feel for Midori is a wholly different emotion. It stands and 
walks on its own, living and breathing and throbbing and shaking me 

 



to the roots of my being. I don't know what to do. I'm confused. I'm 
not trying to make excuses for myself, but I do believe that I have 
lived as sincerely as I know how. I have never lied to anyone, and I 
have taken care over the years not to hurt other people. And yet I find 
myself tossed into this labyrinth. How can this be? I can't explain it. I 
don't know what I should do. Can you tell me, Reiko? You're the only 
one I can turn to for advice. 

I posted the letter that night by special delivery. 

Reiko's answer came five days later, dated 17 June. 

Let me start with the good news. Naoko has been improving far more 
rapidly than anyone could have expected. I talked to her once on the 
phone, and she spoke with real lucidity. She may even be able to come 
back here before long. 

Now, about you. 

I think you take everything too seriously. Loving another person is a 
wonderful thing, and if that love is sincere, no one ends up tossed into 
a labyrinth. You have to have more faith in yourself. 

My advice to you is very simple. First of all, if you are drawn so 
strongly to this Midori person, it is only natural for you to have fallen 
in love with her. It might go well, or it might not. But love is like that. 
When you fall in love, the natural thing to do is give yourself to it. 
That's what I think. It's just a form of sincerity. 

Second, as to whether or not you should have sex with Midori, that is 
for you to work out. I can't say a thing. Talk it over with Midori and 
reach your own conclusion, one that makes sense to you. 

Third, don't tell any of this to Naoko. If things should develop to the 
point where you absolutely have to tell her, then you and I will come 
up with a good plan together. So now, just keep it quiet. Leave it to 
me. 

 



The fourth thing I have to say is that you have been such a great 
source of strength for Naoko that even if you no longer have the 
feelings of a lover towards her, there is still a lot you can do for her. 
So don't brood over everything in that super-serious way of yours. All 
of us (by which I mean all of us, both normal and not-so-normal) are 
imperfect human beings living in an imperfect world. We don't live 
with the mechanical precision of a bank account or by measuring all 
our lines and angles with rulers and protractors. Am I right? 

My own personal feeling is that Midori sounds like a great girl. I 
understand just reading your letter why you would be drawn to her. 
And I understand, too, why you would also be drawn to Naoko. 
There's nothing the least bit sinful about it. Things like that happen all 
the time in this great big world of ours. It's like taking a boat out on a 
beautiful lake on a beautiful day and thinking both the sky and the 
lake are beautiful. So stop eating yourself up. Things will go where 
they're supposed to go if you just let them take their natural course. 
Despite your best efforts, people are going to be hurt when it's time for 
them to be hurt. Life is like that. I know I sound like I'm preaching 
from a pulpit, but it's about time you learned to live like this. You try 
too hard to make life fit your way of doing things. If you don’t want to 
spend time in an insane asylum, you have to open up a little more and 
let yourself go with life's natural flow. I'm just a powerless and 
imperfect woman, but still there are times when I think to myself how 
wonderful life can be! Believe me, it's true! So stop what you're doing 
this minute and get happy. Work at making yourself happy! 

Needless to say, I do feel sorry that you and Naoko could not see 
things through to a happy ending. But who can say what's best? That's 
why you need to grab whatever chance you have of happiness where 
you find it, and not worry about other people too much. My 
experience tells me that we get no more than two or three such 
chances in a lifetime, and if we let them go, we regret it for the rest of 
our lives. 

 



I'm playing the guitar every day for no one in particular. It seems a bit 
pointless. I don't like dark, rainy nights, either. I hope I'll have another 
chance to play my guitar and eat grapes with you and Naoko in the 
room with me. 

Ah, well, until then - 
Reiko Ishida 

 



Reiko wrote to me several times after Naoko's death. It wasn't my 
fault, she said. It was nobody's fault, any more than you could blame 
someone for the rain. But I never answered her. What could I have 
said? What good would it have done? Naoko no longer existed in this 
world; she had become a handful of ashes. 

They held a quiet funeral for Naoko in Kobe at the end of August, and 
when it was over, I went back to Tokyo. I told my landlord I would be 
away for a while and my boss at the Italian restaurant that I wouldn't 
be coming in to work. To Midori I wrote a short note: I couldn’t say 
anything just yet, but I hoped she would wait for me a little longer. I 
spent the next three days in cinemas, and after I had seen every new 
film in Tokyo, I packed my rucksack, took out all my savings from the 
bank, went to Shinjuku Station, and got the first express train I could 
find going out of town. 

Where I went on my travels, it’s impossible for me to recall. I 
remember the sights and sounds and smells clearly enough, but the 
names of the towns are gone, as well as any sense of the order in 
which I travelled from place to place. I would move from town to 
town by train or bus or hitching a lift in a lorry, spreading out my 
sleeping bag in empty car parks or stations or parks or on river banks 
or the seashore. I once persuaded them to let me sleep in the corner of 
a local police station, and another time slept alongside a graveyard. I 
didn't care where I slept, provided I was out of people's way and could 
stay in my sleeping bag as long as I felt like it. Exhausted from 
walking, I would crawl into it, gulp down some cheap whisky, and fall 

 



fast asleep. In nice towns, people would bring me food and mosquito 
coils, and in not-so-nice towns, people would call the police and have 
me chased out of the parks. It made no difference to me one way or 
another. All I wanted was to put myself to sleep in towns I didn’t 
know. 

When I ran low on money, I would work as a labourer for a few days 
until I had what I needed. There was always work for me to do. I just 
kept moving from one town to the next, no destination in mind. The 
world was big and full of weird things and strange people. One time I 
called Midori because I had to hear her voice. 

"Term started a long time ago, yju know," she said. "Some courses 
are even asking for papers already. What are you going to do? Do you 
realize you've been out of touch for three whole weeks now? Where 
are you? What are you doing?" 

"Sorry, but I can't go back to Tokyo yet. Not yet." 

"And that's all you're going to tell me?" 

"There's really nothing more I can say at this point. Maybe in October. 

it 

Midori hung up without a word. 

I went on with my travels. Every now and then I'd stay at a dosshouse 
and have a bath and shave. What I saw in the mirror looked terrible. 
The sun had dried out my skin, my eyes were sunken, and odd stains 
and cuts marked my cheekbones. I looked as if I had just crawled out 
of a cave somewhere, but it was me after all. It was me. 

By that time, I was moving down the coast, as far from Tokyo as I 
could get - maybe in Tottori or the hidden side of Hyogo. Walking 
along the seashore was easy. I could always find a comfortable place 
to sleep in the sand. I'd make a fire from driftwood and roast some 
dried fish I bought from a local fisherman. Then I’d swallow some 
whisky and listen to the waves while I thought about Naoko. It was 
too strange to think that she was dead and no longer part of this world. 
I couldn't absorb the truth of it. I couldn't believe it. I had heard the 

 



nails being driven into the lid of her coffin, but I still couldn't adjust to 
the fact that she had returned to nothingness. 

No, the image of her was still too vivid in my memory. I could still 
see her enclosing my penis in her mouth, her hair falling across my 
belly. I could still feel her warmth, her breath against me, and that 
helpless moment when I could do nothing but come. I could bring all 
this back as clearly as if it had happened only five minutes ago, and I 
felt sure that Naoko was still beside me, that I could just reach out and 
touch her. But no, she wasn't there; her flesh no longer existed in this 
world. 

Nights when it was impossible for me to sleep, images of Naoko 
would come back to me. There was no way I could stop them. Too 
many memories of her were crammed inside me, and as soon as one of 
them found the slightest opening, the rest would force their way out in 
an endless stream, an unstoppable flood: Naoko in her yellow raincape 
cleaning the aviary and carrying the feed bag that rainy morning; the 
caved-in birthday cake and the feel of Naoko's tears soaking through 
my shirt (yes, it had been raining then, too); Naoko walking beside me 
in winter wearing her camel-hair coat; Naoko touching the hairslide 
she always wore; Naoko peering at me with those incredibly clear 
eyes of hers; Naoko sitting on the sofa, legs drawn up beneath her blue 
nightdress, chin resting on her knees. 

The memories would slam against me like the waves of an incoming 
tide, sweeping my body along to some strange new place - a place 
where I lived with the dead. There Naoko lived, and I could speak 
with her and hold her in my arms. Death in that place was not a 
decisive element that brought life to an end. There, death was but one 
of many elements comprising life. There Naoko lived with death 
inside her. And to me she said, "Don't worry, it's only death. Don’t let 
it bother you." 

I felt no sadness in that strange place. Death was death, and Naoko 
was Naoko. "What's the problem?" she asked me with a bashful smile. 

 



"I'm here, aren't I?" Her familiar little gestures soothed my heart like a 
healing balm. "If this is death," I thought to myself, "then death is not 
so bad." "It's true," said Naoko, "death is nothing much. It's just death. 
Things are so easy for me here." Naoko spoke to me in the spaces 
between the crashing of the dark waves. 

Eventually, though, the tide would pull back, and I would be left on 
the beach alone. Powerless, I could go nowhere; sadness itself would 
envelop me in deep darkness until the tears came. I felt less that I was 
crying than that the tears were simply oozing out of me like 
perspiration. 

I had learned one thing from Kizuki's death, and I believed that I had 
made it a part of myself in the form of a philosophy: "Death exists, not 
as the opposite but as a part of life." 

By living our lives, we nurture death. True as this might be, it was 
only one of the truths we had to leam. What I learned from Naoko's 
death was this: no truth can cure the sadness we feel from losing a 
loved one. No truth, no sincerity, no strength, no kindness, can cure 
that sorrow. All we can do is see that sadness through to the end and 
leam something from it, but what we learn will be no help in facing 
the next sadness that comes to us without warning. Hearing the waves 
at night, listening to the sound of the wind, day after day I focused on 
these thoughts of mine. Knapsack on my back, sand in my hair, I 
moved farther and farther west, surviving on a diet of whisky, bread 
and water. 

One windy evening, as I lay wrapped in my sleeping bag, weeping, by 
the side of an abandoned hulk, a young fisherman passed by and 
offered me a cigarette. I accepted it and had my first smoke in over a 
year. He asked why I was crying, and almost by reflex I told him that 
my mother had died. I couldn’t take the sadness, I said, and so I was 
on the road. He expressed his deep sympathy and brought a big bottle 
of sake and two glasses from his house. 

 



The wind tore along the sand beach as we sat there drinking. He told 
me that he had lost his mother when he was 16. Never healthy, she 
had worn herself out working from morning to night. I half-listened to 
him, sipping my sake and grunting in response every now and then. I 
felt as if I were hearing a story from some far-off world. What the hell 
was he talking about? I wondered, and all of a sudden I was filled with 
intense rage: I wanted to strangle him. Who gives a shit about your 
mother? I've lost Naoko! Her beautiful flesh has vanished from this 
world! Why the hell are you telling me about your fucking mother?! 

But my rage disappeared as quickly as it had flared up. I closed my 
eyes and went on half-listening to the fisherman's endless talk. 
Eventually he asked me if I had eaten. No, I said, but in my rucksack I 
had bread and cheese, a tomato and a piece of chocolate. What had I 
eaten for lunch ? he asked. 

Bread and cheese, tomato and chocolate, I answered. "Wait here," he 
said and ran off. I tried to stop him, but he disappeared into the 
darkness without looking back. 

All I could do was go on drinking my sake. The shore was littered 
with paper flecks from fireworks that had been exploded on the sand, 
and waves crashed against the beach with a mad roar. A scrawny dog 
came up wagging its tail and sniffing around my little campfire for 
something to eat but eventually gave up and wandered away. 

The young fisherman came back half an hour later with two boxes of 
sushi and a new bottle of sake. I should eat the top box straight away 
because that had fish in it, he said, but the bottom box had only nori 
rolls and deep-fried tofu skins so they would last all tomorrow. He 
filled both our glasses with sake from the new bottle. I thanked him 
and polished off the whole top box myself, though it had more than 
enough for two. After we had drunk as much sake as we could 
manage, he offered to put me up for the night, but when I said I would 
rather sleep alone on the beach, he left it at that. As he stood to go, he 
took a folded ? 5,000 note from his pocket and shoved it into the 

 



pocket of my shirt. "Here," he said, "get yourself some healthy food. 
You look awful." I said he had done more than enough for me and that 
I couldn’t accept money on top of everything else, but he refused to 
take it back. "It's not money," he said, "it's my feelings. Don’t think 
about it too much, just take it." All I could do was thank him and 
accept it. 

When he had gone, I suddenly thought about my old girlfriend, the 
one I had first slept with in my last year of school. Chills ran through 
me as I realized how badly I had treated her. I had hardly ever thought 
about her thoughts or feelings or the pain I had caused her. She was 
such a sweet and gentle thing, but at the time I had taken her 
sweetness for granted and later hardly gave her a second thought. 
What was she doing now? I wondered. And had she forgiven me? 

A wave of nausea came over me, and I vomited by the old ship. My 
head hurt from too much sake, and I felt bad about having lied to the 
fisherman and taken his money. It was time for me to go back to 
Tokyo, I decided; I couldn’t keep this up for ever. I stuffed my 
sleeping bag into my rucksack, slipped my amis through the straps 
and walked to the local railway station. I told the man at the ticket- 
office window that I wanted to get to Tokyo as soon as possible. He 
checked his timetable and said I could make it as far as Osaka by 
morning if I transferred from one night train to another, then I could 
take the bullet train from there. I thanked him and used the x"5,000 
note the fisherman gave me to buy a ticket to Tokyo. Waiting for the 
train, I bought a newspaper and checked the date: 2 October, 1970. So 
I had been travelling for a full month. I knew I had to go back to the 
real world. 

The month of travelling neither lifted my spirits nor softened the blow 
of Naoko's death. I arrived back in Tokyo in pretty much the same 
state in which I had left. I couldn't even bring myself to phone Midori. 
What could I say to her? How could I begin? "It’s all over now; you 
and I can be happy together"? No, that was out of the question. 

 



However I might phrase it, though, the facts were the same: Naoko 
was dead, and Midori was still here. Naoko was a mound of white ash, 
and Midori was a living, breathing human being. 

I was overcome with a sense of my own defilement. Though I 
returned to Tokyo I did nothing for days but shut myself up in my 
room. My memory remained fixed on the dead rather than the living. 
The rooms I had set aside in there for Naoko were shuttered, the 
furniture draped in white, the windowsills dusty. I spent the better part 
of each day in those rooms. And I thought about Kizuki. "So you 
finally made Naoko yours," I heard myself telling him. "Oh, well, she 
was yours to begin with. Now, maybe, she's where she belongs. But in 
this world, in this imperfect world of the living, I did the best I could 
for Naoko. I tried to establish a new life for the two of us. But forget 
it, Kizuki. I'm giving her to you. You're the one she chose, after all. In 
woods as dark as the depths of her own heart, she hanged herself. 
Once upon a time, you dragged a part of me into the world of the 
dead, and now Naoko has dragged another part of me into that world. 
Sometimes I feel like the caretaker of a museum - a huge, empty 
museum where no one ever comes, and I'm watching over it for no 
one but myself." 

The fourth day after my return to Tokyo, a letter came from Reiko. 
Special delivery. It was a simple note: I haven't been able 
to get in touch with you for weeks, and I'm worried. Please call me. At  a.m. and 9 p.m. I will be waiting by the telephone. 

I called her at nine o'clock that night. Reiko picked up after one ring. 
"Are you OK?" she asked. 

"More or less," I said. 

"Do you mind if I come and visit you the day after tomorrow?" 

"Visit me? You mean here in Tokyo?" 

"That's exactly what I mean. I want to have a good, long talk with 
you." 

 



"You're leaving the sanatorium?" 

"It's the only way I can come and see you, isn’t it? Anyway, it's about 
time for me to get out of this place. I've been here eight years, after all. 
If they keep me any longer. I'll start to rot." 

I found it difficult to speak. After a short silence. Reiko went on: "I'll 
be on the 3.20 bullet train the day after tomorrow. Will you meet me 
at the station? Do you still remember what I look like? Or have you 
lost interest in me now that Naoko's dead?" 

"No way," I said. "See you at Tokyo Station the day after tomorrow at .20." 

"You won't have any trouble recognizing me. I'm the old lady with the 
guitar case. There aren't many of those." 

And in fact, I had no trouble finding Reiko in the crowd. She wore a 
man's tweed jacket, white trousers, and red trainers. Her hair was as 
short as ever, with the usual clumps sticking up. In her right hand she 
held a brown leather suitcase, and in her left a black guitar case. She 
gave me a big, wrinkly smile the moment she spotted me, and I found 
myself grinning back. I took her suitcase and walked beside her to the 
train for the western suburbs. 

"Hey, Watanabe, how long have you been wearing that awful face? Or 
is that the 'in' look in Tokyo these days?" 

"I was travelling for a while, ate junk all the time," I said. "How did 
you find the bullet train?" 

"Awful!" she said. "You can't open the windows. I wanted to buy a 
box lunch from one of the station buffets." 

"They sell them on board, you know." 

"Yeah, overpriced plastic sandwiches. A starving horse wouldn’t touch 
that stuff. I always used to enjoy the boxed lunches at Gotenba 
Station." 

"Once upon a time, before the bullet train." 

"Well, I'm from once upon a time before the bullet train!" 

 



On the train out to Kichijoji. Reiko watched the Musashino landscape 
passing the window with all the curiosity of a tourist. 

"Has it changed much in eight years?" I asked. 

"You don't know what I'm feeling now, do you, Watanabe?" "No, I 
don't." 

"I'm scared," she said. "So scared, I could go crazy just like that. I 
don't know what I'm supposed to do, flung out here all by myself." 
She paused. "But 'Go crazy just like that.' Kind of a cool expression, 
don’t you think?" 

I smiled and took her hand. "Don't worry," I said. "You'll be OK. Your 
own strength got you this far." 

"It wasn't my own strength that got me out of that place," Reiko said. 
"It was Naoko and you. I couldn’t stand it there without Naoko, and I 
had to come to Tokyo to talk to you. That's all. If nothing had 
happened I probably would have spent the rest of my life there." 

I nodded. 

"What are you planning to do from now on?" I asked Reiko. 

"I'm going to Asahikawa," she said. "Way up in the wilds of 
Hokkaido! An old college friend of mine runs a music school there, 
and she's been asking me for two or three years now to help her out. I 
told her it was too cold for me. I mean, I finally get my freedom back 
and I'm supposed to go to Asahikawa? It's hard to get excited about a 
place like that - some hole in the ground." 

"It's not so awful," I said, laughing. "I've been there. It's not a bad little 
town. Got its own special atmosphere." "Are you sure?" 

"Absolutely. It's much better than staying in Tokyo." 

"Oh, well," she said. "I don’t have anywhere else to go, and I've 
already sent my stuff there. Hey, Watanabe, promise me you'll come 
and visit me in Asahikawa." 

"Of course I will. But do you have to leave straight away? 

Can't you stay in Tokyo for a while?" 

"I’d like to hang around here a few days if I can. Can you put me up? I 

 



won't get in your way." 

"No problem," I said. "I have a big closet I can sleep in, in 
my sleeping bag." 

"I can't do that to you." 

"No, really. It's a huge closet." 

Reiko tapped out a rhythm on the guitar case between her legs. "I'm 
probably going to have to condition myself a little before I go to 
Asahikawa. I'm just not used to being in the outside world. There's a 
lot of stuff I don’t get, and I'm nervous. Think you can help me out a 
little? You're the only one I can ask." 

"I'll do anything I can to help you," I said. 

"I hope I'm not getting in your way," she said. "I don’t have any way 
for you to get in," I said. 

She looked at me and turned up the corners of her mouth in a smile 
but said nothing. 

We hardly talked the rest of the way to Kichijoji Station or on the bus 
back to my place. We traded a few random comments on the changes 
in Tokyo and Reiko's time at the College of Music and my one trip to 
Asahikawa, but said nothing about Naoko. Ten months had gone by 
since I last saw Reiko, but walking by her side I felt strangely calmed 
and comforted. This was a familiar feeling, I thought, and then it 
occurred to me it was the way I used to feel when walking the streets 
of Tokyo with Naoko. And just as Naoko and I had shared the dead 
Kizuki, Reiko and I shared the dead Naoko. This thought made it 
impossible for me to go on talking. Reiko continued speaking for a 
while, but when she realized that I wasn't saying anything, she also 
fell silent. Neither of us said a word on the bus. 

It was one of those early autumn afternoons when the light is sharp 
and clear, exactly as it had been a year earlier when I visited Naoko in 
Kyoto. The clouds were white and as narrow as bones, the sky wide 
open and high. The fragrance of the breeze, the tone of the light, the 

 



tiny flowers in the grass, the subtle reverberations that accompanied 
sounds: all these told me that autumn had come again, increasing the 
distance between me and the dead with each cycle of the seasons. 
Kizuki was still 17 and Naoko 21: for ever. 

"Oh, what a relief to come to a place like this!" Reiko said, looking all 
around as we stepped off the bus. 

"Because there's nothing here," I said. 

As I led her through the back gate through the garden to my cottage, 
Reiko was impressed by everything she saw. 

"This is terrific!" she said. "You made these shelves and the desk?" 
"Yep," I said, pouring tea. 

"You're obviously good with your hands. And you keep the place so 
clean!" 

"Storm Trooper's influence," I said. "He turned me into a cleanliness 
freak. Not that my landlord's complaining." 

"Oh, your landlord! I ought to introduce myself to him. 

That's his place on the other side of the garden, I suppose." "Introduce 
yourself to him? What for?" 

"What do you mean "what for'? Some weird old lady shows up in your 
place and starts playing the guitar, he's going to wonder what's going 
on. Better to start out on the right foot. I even brought a box of tea 
sweets for him." "Very clever," I said. 

"The wisdom that comes with age. I'm going to tell him I'm your aunt 
on your mother's side, visiting from Kyoto, so don't contradict me. 
The age difference comes in handy at times like this. Nobody's going 
to get suspicious." 

Reiko took the box of sweets from her bag and went off to pay her 
respects. I sat on the veranda, drinking another cup of tea and playing 
with the cat. Twenty minutes went by, and when Reiko finally came 
back, she pulled a tin of rice crackers from her bag and said it was a 
present for me. 

 



"What were you talking about for so long?" I asked, munching on a 
cracker. 

"You, of course," said Reiko, cradling the cat and nibbing her cheek 
against it. "He says you're a very proper young man, a serious 
student." 

"Are you sme he was talking about me?" 

"There is not the slightest doubt in my mind that he was talking about 
you," she said with a laugh. Then, noticing my guitar, she picked it up, 
adjusted the tuning, and played Antonio Carlos Jobim's "Desafinado". 
It had been months since I last heard Reiko's guitar, and it gave me 
that old, warm feeling. 

"You practising the guitar?" she asked. 

"It was kicking around the landlord's storehouse, so I borrowed it and 
I plunk on it once in a while. That's all." 

"I'll give you a lesson later. Absolutely free." Reiko put down the 
guitar and took off her tweed jacket. Sitting against the veranda post, 
she smoked a cigarette. She was wearing a madras check short-sleeve 
shirt. 

"Nice shirt, don't you think?" she asked. 

"It is," I said. In fact it was a good-looking shirt with a handsome 
pattern. 

"It's Naoko's," said Reiko. "I bet you didn’t know we were the same 
size. Especially when she first came to the sanatorium. She put on a 
little weight after that, but still we were pretty much the same size: 
blouses, trousers, shoes, hats. Bras were about the only thing we 
couldn’t share. I've got practically nothing here. So we were always 
swapping clothes. Actually, it was more like joint ownership." 

Now that she mentioned it, I saw that Reiko's build was almost 
identical to Naoko's. Because of the shape of her face and her thin 
arms and legs, she had always given me the impression of being 
smaller and slimmer than Naoko, but in fact she was surprisingly 
solid. 

 



"The jacket and trousers are hers, too," said Reiko. "It's all hers. Does 
it bother you to see me wearing her stuff?" 

"Not at all," I said. "I'm sure Naoko would be glad to have somebody 
wearing her clothes - especially you." 

"It's strange," Reiko said with a little snap of the fingers. "Naoko 
didn't leave a will or anything - except where her clothes were 
concerned. She scribbled one line on a memo pad on her desk. "Please 
give all my clothes to Reiko.’ She was a funny one, don’t you think? 
Why would she be concerned about her clothes of all things when 
she's getting ready to die? Who gives a damn about clothes? She must 
have had tons of other things she wanted to say." 

"Maybe not," I said. 

Puffing on her cigarette, Reiko seemed lost in thought. Then she said, 
"You want to hear the whole story, in order, I suppose." 

"I do," I said. "Please tell me everything." 

"Tests at the hospital in Osaka showed that Naoko's condition was 
improving for the moment but that she should stay there on a 
somewhat longer-term basis so that they could 

continue the intensive therapy for its future benefits. I told you that 
much in my letter - the one I sent you somewhere around the tenth of 
August." 

"Right. I read that letter." 

"Well, on the 24th of August I got a call from Naoko's mother asking 
if it was OK for Naoko to visit me at the sanatorium. Naoko wanted to 
pack the things she had left with me and, because she wouldn't be able 
to see me for a while, she wanted to have a nice long talk with me, and 
perhaps spend a night in our flat. I said that would be fine. I wanted to 
see her really badly and to have a talk with her. So Naoko and her 
mother arrived the next day, the 25th, in a taxi. The three of us worked 
together, packing Naoko's things and chatting away. Late in the 
afternoon, Naoko said it would be OK for her mother to go home, that 

 



she’d be fine, so they called a taxi and the mother left. We weren't 
worried at all because Naoko seemed to be in such good spirits. In 
fact, until then I had been very worried. I had been expecting her to be 
depressed and worn out and emaciated. I mean, I knew how much the 
testing and therapy and stuff they do at those hospitals can take it out 
of you, so I had some real doubts about this visit. But one look at her 
was all it took to convince me she'd be OK. She looked a lot healthier 
than I had expected and she was smiling and joking and talking much 
more normally than when I had seen her last. She had been to the 
hairdresser's and was showing off her new hairdo. So I thought there 
would be nothing to worry about even if her mother left us alone. 
Naoko told me that this time she was going to let those hospital 
doctors cure her once and for all, and I said that that would probably 
be the best thing to do. So then the two of us went out for a walk, 
talking all the time, mainly about the future. Naoko told me that what 
she’d really like was for the two of us to get out of the sanatorium and 
live together somewhere." 

"Live together? You and Naoko?" 

"That's right," said Reiko with a little shrug. "So I told her it sounded 
good to me, but what about Watanabe? And she said, "Don't worry. 
I'll get everything straight with him.' That's all. Then she talked about 
where she and I would live and what we'd do, that kind of thing. After 
that we went to the aviary and played with the birds." 

I took a beer from the fridge and opened it. Reiko lit another cigarette, 
the cat sound asleep in her lap. 

"That girl had everything worked out for herself. I'm sure that's why 
she was so full of energy and smiling and healthylooking. It must have 
been such a load off her mind to feel she knew exactly what she was 
going to do. So then we finished going through her stuff and throwing 
what she didn't need into the metal drum in the garden and burning it: 
the notebook she had used as a diary, and all the letters she had 
received. Your letters, too. This seemed a bit strange to me, so I asked 

 



her why she was burning stuff like that. I mean, she had always been 
so careful about putting your letters away in a safe place and reading 
them over and over. She said, "I'm getting rid of everything from the 
past so I can be reborn in the future.' I suppose I pretty much took her 
at her word. It had its own kind of logic to it, sort of. I remember 
thinking how much I wanted her to get healthy and happy. She was so 
sweet and lovely that day: I wish you could have seen her! 

"When that was over, we went to the dining hall for supper the way 
we used to. Then we bathed and I opened a bottle of good wine that I 
had been keeping for a special occasion like this and we drank and I 
played the guitar. The Beatles, as always, "Norwegian Wood", 
"Michelle", her favourites. Both of us were feeling pretty good. We 
turned out the lights, got undressed and lay in our beds. It was one of 
those steaming hot nights. We had the windows wide open, but there 
was hardly a breath of wind. It was black as ink outside, the 
grasshoppers were screaming, and the smell of the summer grass was 
so thick in the room it was hard to breathe. All of a sudden, Naoko 
started talking about you - about the night she had sex with you. In 
incredible detail. How you took her clothes off, how you touched her, 
how she found herself getting wet, how you went inside her, how 
wonderful it felt: she told me all of this in vivid detail. So I asked her: 
why are you telling me this now, all of a sudden? I mean, up to then, 
she had never spoken openly to me about sex. Of course, we had had 
some frank sexual talk as a kind of therapy, but she had been too 
embarrassed to go into details. Now I couldn't stop her. I was shocked. 
"So she says, "I don’t know, I just feel like talking about it. I'll stop if 
you’d rather not hear it.' "No,' I said, that's OK. "If there's something 
you need to talk about, you'd better get it all out. I'll listen to anything 
you have to say.' 

"So she went on with her story: "When he went inside me, I couldn't 
believe how much it hurt. It was my first time, after all. I was so wet, 
he slipped right in, but still, my brain fogged over - it hurt so much. 

 



He put it in as far as he could. I thought, but then he lifted my legs and 
went in even farther. That sent chills all through my body, as if I was 
soaking in ice water. My arms and legs went numb, and a wave of 
cold went through me. I didn’t know what was happening. I thought I 
might die right there and then, and I didn't care one way or another. 
But he realized I was in pain, so he stopped moving, and still deep 
inside me, he started kissing me all over - my hair, my neck, my 
breasts - for a long, long time. Little by little, the warmth returned to 
my body, and then, very slowly, he started to move. Oh, Reiko, it was 
so wonderful! Now it felt as if my brain was just going to melt away. I 
wanted to stay like that forever, to stay in his arms for the rest of my 
life. That’s how great it was.’ 

"So I said to her, "If it was so great, why didn’t you just stay with 
Watanabe and keep doing it every day?’ But she said, "No. Reiko, I 
knew it would never happen again. I knew this was something that 
would come to me once, and leave, and never come back. This would 
be a once-in-a-lifetime thing. I had never felt anything like it before, 
and I've never felt anything like it since. I’ve never felt that I wanted to 
do it again, and I've never grown wet like that again.’ 

"Of course, I explained to her that this was something that often 
happened to young women and that, in most cases, it cures itself with 
age. And, after all, it had worked that one time: there was no need to 
worry it wouldn't happen again. I myself had had all kinds of trouble 
when I was first married. 

"But she said. "No, that’s not it, Reiko. I'm not worried about that at 
all. I just don’t want anybody going inside me again. I just don’t want 
to be violated like that again - by anybody'." 

I drank my beer, and Reiko finished her second cigarette. The cat 
stretched itself in Reiko's lap, found a new position and went back to 
sleep. Reiko seemed at a loss how to go on until she had lit her third 
cigarette. 

"After that, Naoko began to sob. I sat on the edge of her bed and 

 



stroked her hair. "Don't worry,' I said, "everything is going to be all 
right. A beautiful, young girl like you has got to have a man to hold 
her and make her happy.' Naoko was drenched in sweat and tears. I 
got a bath towel and dried her face and body. Even her panties were 
soaked, so I helped her out of 

them - now wait a minute, don't get any strange ideas, there was 
nothing funny going on. We always used to bathe together. She was 
like my little sister." 

"I know, I know," I said. 

"Well, anyway, Naoko said she wanted me to hold her. I said it was 
far too hot for holding, but she said it was the last time we'd be seeing 
each other, so I held her. Just for a while. With a bath towel between 
us so our sweaty bodies wouldn't stick to each other. And when she 
calmed down, I dried her off again, got her nightdress on her and put 
her to bed. She fell sound asleep straight away. Or maybe she was just 
pretending to sleep. Whatever, she looked so sweet and lovely that 
night, she had the face of a girl of 13 or 14 who’s never had a bit of 
harm done to her since the day she was bom. I saw that look on her 
face, and I knew I could let myself fall asleep with an easy heart. 

When I woke at six in the morning, she was gone. Her nightdress was 
there, where she had dropped it, but her clothes and trainers and the 
torch I always keep by my pillow were missing. I knew immediately 
that something was wrong. I mean, the very fact that she had taken the 
torch meant she had left in the dark. I checked her desk just in case, 
and 

there was the note: Please give all my clothes to Reiko. I woke 
up everybody straight away, and we took different paths to look for 
her. We searched every inch of the place, from the insides of the 
dorms to the surrounding woods. It took us five hours to find her. 
She’d even brought her own rope." 

Reiko sighed and patted the cat. 

"Want some tea?" I asked. 

 



"Yes, thanks," said Reiko. 

I boiled water and brought a pot of tea back to the veranda. Sundown 
was approaching. The daylight had grown weak, and long shadows of 
trees stretched to our feet. I sipped my tea and looked at the strangely 
random garden with its funny mix of yellow globeflowers and pink 
azaleas and tall, green nandins. 

"So then the ambulance came and took Naoko away and the police 
started questioning me. Not that there was much doubt. There was a 
kind of suicide note, and it had obviously been a suicide, and they 
took it for granted that suicide was just one of those things that mental 
patients did. So it was pretty pro forma. As soon as they left, I 
telegraphed you." 

"What a sad little funeral it was," I said. "Her family was obviously 
upset that I knew Naoko had died. I'm sure they didn't want people to 
know it was suicide. I probably shouldn't even have been there. Which 
made me feel even worse. As soon as I got back, I hit the road." 

"Hey, Watanabe, let's go for a walk. We can shop for something to 
make for dinner, maybe. I'm starving." 

"Sure. Is there something you want to eat?" 

"Sukiyaki," she said. "I haven't had anything like that for years. I used 
to dream about sukiyaki - just stuffing myself with beef and green 
onions and noodles and roasted tofu and greens." 

"Sure, we can have that, but I don't have a sukiyaki pan." "Just leave it 
to me. I'll borrow one from your landlord." She ran off to the main 
house and came back with a good 

sized pan and gas cooker and rubber hose. "Not bad, eh?" 

"Not bad!" 

We bought all the ingredients at the little shops in the neighbourhood - 
beef, eggs, vegetables, tofu. I picked out a fairly decent white wine. I 
tried to pay, but Reiko insisted on paying for everything. 

"Think how the family would laugh at me if they heard I let my 
nephew pay for the food!" said Reiko. "Besides, I'm carrying a fair 

 



amount of cash. So don't worry. I wasn't about to leave the sanatorium 
broke." 

Reiko washed the rice and put it on to boil while I arranged everything 
for cooking on the veranda. When everything was ready, Reiko took 
out her guitar and appeared to be testing it with a slow Bach fugue. On 
the hard parts she would purposely slow down or speed up or make it 
detached or sentimental, listening with obvious pleasure to the variety 
of sounds she could draw from the instrument. When she played the 
guitar, Reiko looked like a 17-year-old girl enjoying the sight of a new 
dress. Her eyes sparkled, and she pouted with just the hint of a smile. 
When she had finished the piece, she leaned back against a pillar and 
looked up at the sky as though deep in thought. 

"Do you mind if I talk to you?" I asked. 

"Not at all," she said. "I was just thinking how hungry I am." 

"Aren't you planning to see your husband or your daughter while 
you're here? They must be in Tokyo somewhere." 

"Close enough. Yokohama. But no, I don’t plan to see them. I'm sure I 
told you before: it's better for them if they don't have anything more to 
do with me. They've started a new life. And I'd just feel terrible if I 
saw them. No, the best thing is to keep away." 

She crumpled up her empty box of Seven Stars cigarettes and took a 
new one from her suitcase. She cut the seal and put a cigarette in her 
mouth, but she didn't light up. 

"I'm finished as a human being," she said. "All you're looking at is the 
lingering memory of what I used to be. The most important part of 
me, what used to be inside, died years ago, and I'm just functioning by 
auto-memory." 

"But I like you now, Reiko, the way you are, lingering memory or 
whatever. And what I have to say about it may not make any 
difference, but I'm really glad that you're wearing Naoko's clothes." 
Reiko smiled and lit her cigarette with a lighter. "For such a young 
man, you know how to make a woman happy." 

 



I felt myself reddening. "I'm just saying what I really think." "Sure, I 
know," said Reiko, smiling. When the rice was done soon after that, I 
oiled the pan and arranged the ingredients for sukiyaki. 

"Tell me this isn't a dream," said Reiko, sniffing the air. 

"No, this is 100 per cent realistic sukiyaki," I said. "Empirically 
speaking, of course." 

Instead of talking, we attacked the sukiyaki with our chopsticks, drank 
lots of beer, and finished up with rice. Seagull turned up, attracted by 
the smell, so we shared our meat with her. When we had eaten our fill, 
we sat leaning against the porch pillars looking at the moon. 

"Satisfied?" I asked. 

"Totally," she groaned. "I've never eaten so much in my life." 

"What do you want to do now?" 

"Have a smoke and go to a public bath. My hair's a mess. I need to 
wash it." 

"No problem. There's one down the street." 

"Tell me, Watanabe, if you don’t mind. Have you slept with that girl 
Midori?" 

"You mean have we had sex? Not yet. We decided not to until things 
get sorted out." 

"Well, now they're sorted out, wouldn't you say?" 

I shook my head. "Now that Naoko's dead, you mean?" 

"No, not that. You made your decision long before Naoko died - that 
you could never leave Midori. Whether Naoko is alive or dead, it has 
nothing to do with your decision. You chose Midori. Naoko chose to 
die. You're all grown up now, so you have to take responsibility for 
your choices. Otherwise, you ruin everything." 

"But I can't forget her," I said. "I told Naoko I would go on waiting for 
her, but I couldn't do it. I turned my back on her in the end. I’m not 
saying anyone's to blame: it's a problem for me myself. I do think that 
things would have worked out the same way even if I hadn't turned 
my back on her. Naoko was choosing death all along. But that's beside 

 



the point. I can't forgive myself. You tell me there's nothing I can do 
about a natural change in feelings, but my relationship with Naoko 
was not that simple. If you stop and think about it, she and I were 
bound together at the border between life and death. It was like that 
for us from the start." 

"If you feel some kind of pain with regard to Naoko's death, I would 
advise you to keep on feeling that pain for the rest of your life. And if 
there's something you can learn from it, you should do that, too. But 
quite aside from that, you should be happy with Midori. Your pain has 
nothing to do with your relationship with her. If you hurt her any more 
than you already have, the wound could be too deep to fix. So, hard as 
it may be, you have to be strong. You have to grow up more, be more 
of an adult. I left the sanatorium and came all the way up here to 
Tokyo to tell you that - all the way on that coffin of a train." 

"I understand what you're telling me," I said to Reiko, "but I'm still not 
prepared to follow through on it. I mean, that was such a sad little 
funeral! No one should have to die like that." 

Reiko stretched out her hand and stroked my head. "We all have to die 
like that sometime. I will, and so will you." 

We took the five-minute walk along the river bank to the local public 
baths and came home feeling more refreshed. I opened the bottle of 
wine and we sat on the veranda drinking it. 

"Hey, Watanabe, could you bring out another glass?" 

"Stue," I said. "But what for?" 

"We're going to have otu own funeral for Naoko, just the two of us. 
One that's not so sad." 

When I handed her the glass, Reiko filled it to the brim and set it on 
the stone lantern in the garden. Then she sat on the veranda, leaning 
against a pillar, guitar in her arms, and smoked a cigarette. 

"And now could you bring out a box of matches? Make it the biggest 

 



one you can find." 

I brought out an economy-size box of kitchen matches and sat down 
next to her. 

"Now what I want you to do is lay down a match every time I play a 
song, just set them in a row. I'm going to play every song I can think 
of." 

First she played a soft, lovely rendition of Henry Mancini's "Dear 
Heart". 

"You gave a recording of this to Naoko, didn't you?" she asked. 

"I did. For Christmas the year before last. She really liked that song." 

"I like it, too," said Reiko. "So sweet and beautiful ..." and she ran 
through a few bars of the melody one more time before taking another 
sip of wine. "I wonder how many songs I can play before I get 
completely drunk. This’ll be a nice funeral, don't you think - not so 
sad?" 

Reiko moved on to the Beatles, playing "Norwegian Wood", 
"Yesterday", "Michelle", and "Something". She sang and played 
"Here Comes the Sun", then played "The Fool on the Hill". I laid 
seven matches in a row. 

"Seven songs," said Reiko, sipping more wine and smoking another 
cigarette. "Those guys sure knew something about the sadness of life, 
and gentleness." 

By "those guys" Reiko of course meant John Lennon. Paul McCartney 
and George Harrison. After a short breather, Reiko crushed her 
cigarette out and picked up her guitar again. She played "Penny Lane", 
"Blackbird", "Julia", "When I'm 64", "Nowhere Man", "And I Love 
Her", and "Hey Jude". 

"How many songs is that?" 

"Fourteen," I said. 

She sighed and asked me, "How about you? Can you play something - 
maybe one song?" 

"No way. I’m terrible." 

 



"So play it terribly." 

I brought out my guitar and stumbled my way through "Up on the 
Roof". Reiko took a rest, smoking and drinking. When I was through, 
she applauded. 

Next she played a guitar transcription of Ravel's "Pavanne for a Dying 
Queen" and a beautifully clean rendition of Debussy's "Claire de 
Lune". 

"I mastered both of these after Naoko died," said Reiko. "To the end. 
her taste in music never rose above the sentimental." 

She performed a few Bacharach songs next: "Close to You", 
"Raindrops Keep Falling on my Head", "Walk on By", "Wedding Bell 
Blues". 

"Twenty," I said. 

"I'm like a human jukebox!" exclaimed Reiko. "My professors would 
faint if they could see me now." 

She went on sipping and puffing and playing: several bossa novas, 
Rogers and Hart, Gershwin, Bob Dylan, Ray Charles, Carole King, 
The Beach Boys, Stevie Wonder. Kyu Sakamoto's "Sukiyaki Song", 
"Blue Velvet", "Green Fields". Sometimes she would close her eyes 
and nod or hum to the melody. 

When the wine was gone, we turned to whisky. The wine in the glass 
in the garden I poured over the stone lantern and replaced it with 
whisky. 

"How's our count going?" Reiko asked. "Forty-eight," I said. 

For our forty-ninth song Reiko played "Eleanor Rigby", and the 
fiftieth was another performance of "Norwegian Wood". After that she 
rested her hands and drank some whisky. "Maybe that's enough," she 
said. 

"It is," I answered. "Amazing." 

Reiko looked me in the eye and said, "Now listen to me, Watanabe. I 
want you to forget all about that sad little funeral you saw. Just 

 



remember this marvellous one of ours." 

I nodded. 

"Here's one more for good measure," she said, and for her fifty-first 
piece she played her favourite Bach fugue. When she was through, she 
said in a voice just above a whisper, "How about doing it with me, 
Watanabe?" 

"Strange," I said. "I was thinking the same thing." 

We went inside and drew the curtains. Then, in the darkened room, 
Reiko and I sought out each other's bodies as if it were the most 
natural thing in the world for us to do. I removed her blouse and 
trousers, and then her underwear. 

"I've lived a strange life," said Reiko, "but I never thought I’d have my 
panties removed for me by a man 19 years my junior." 

"Would you rather take them off yourself?" 

"No, go ahead. But don't be too shocked at all my wrinkles." 

"I like your wrinkles." 

"You're gonna make me cry," she whispered. 

I kissed her all over, taking special care to follow the wrinkled places 
with my tongue. She had the breasts of a little girl. I caressed them 
and took her nipples in my teeth, then slid a finger inside her warm, 
moist vagina and began to move it. 

"Wrong spot, Watanabe," Reiko whispered in my ear. "That's just a 
wrinkle." 

"I can't believe you're telling jokes at a time like this!" 

"Sorry," she said. "I'm scared. I haven't done this for years. I feel like 
a 17-year-old girl: I just went to visit a guy in his room, and all of a 
sudden I'm naked." 

"To tell you the truth, I feel as if I'm violating a 17-year-old girl." 

With my finger in her "wrinkle", I moved my lips up her neck to her 
ear and took a nipple in my fingers. As her breathing intensified and 
her throat began to tremble, I parted her long, slim legs and eased 

 



myself inside her. 

"You're not going to get me pregnant now, are you? You're taking care 
of that, right?" Reiko murmured in my ear. "I’d be so embarrassed if I 
got pregnant at this age." 

"Don't worry," I said. "Just relax." 

When I was all the way in, she trembled and released a sigh. 
Caressing her back, I moved inside her and then, without warning, I 
came. It was an intense, unstoppable ejaculation. I clutched at her as 
my semen pulsed into her warmth again and again. 

"I'm sorry," I said. "I couldn't stop myself." 

"Don’t be silly," Reiko said, giving me a little slap on the rump. "You 
don't have to worry about that. Do you always have that on your mind 
when you're doing it with girls?" 

"Yeah, pretty much." 

"Well, you don't have to think about it with me. Forget it. 

Just let yourself go as much as you like. Did it feel good?" "Fantastic. 
That's why I couldn't control myself." 

"This is no time for controlling yourself. This is fine. It was 
great for me, too." 

"You know, Reiko," I said. 

"What's that?" 

"You ought to take a lover again. You're terrific. It's such a waste." 
"Well, I'll think about it," she said. "But I wonder if people take lovers 
and things in Asahikawa." 

Growing hard a few minutes later, I went inside her again. Reiko held 
her breath and twisted beneath me. I moved slowly and quietly with 
my arms around her, and we talked. It felt wonderful to talk that way. 
If I said something funny and made her laugh, the tremors came into 
me through my penis. We held each other like this for a very long 
time. 

"Oh, this feels marvellous!" Reiko said. 

"Moving's not bad either," I said. 

 



"Go ahead. Give it a try." 

I lifted her hips and went in as far as I could go, then savoured the 
sensation of moving in a circular pattern until, having enjoyed it to the 
full, I let myself come. 

Altogether, we joined our bodies four times that night. At the end each 
time, Reiko would lie in my arms trembling slightly, eyes closed, and 
release a long sigh. 

"I never have to do this again," said Reiko, "for the rest of my life. Oh, 
please, Watanabe, tell me it's true. Tell me I can relax now because 
I've done enough to last a lifetime." 

"Nobody can tell you that," I said. "There's no way of knowing." 

I tried to convince Reiko that taking a plane would be faster and 
easier, but she insisted on going to Asahikawa by train. 

"I like the ferry to Hokkaido. And I have no desire to fly through the 
air," she said. I accompanied her to Ueno Station. She carried her 
guitar and I carried her suitcase. We sat on a platform bench waiting 
for the train to pull in. Reiko wore the same tweed jacket and white 
trousers she had on when she arrived in Tokyo. 

"Do you really think Asahikawa's not such a bad place?" she asked. 

"It's a nice town. I'll visit you there soon." 

"Really?" 

I nodded. "And I'll write to you." 

"I love your letters. Naoko burned all the ones you sent her. And they 
were such great letters too!" 

"Letters are just pieces of paper," I said. "Burn them, and what stays in 
your heart will stay; keep them, and what 
vanishes will vanish." 

"You know, Watanabe, 

Asahikawa by myself. So be sure to write to me. Whenever I read 
your letters, I feel you're right there next to me." 

"If that's what you want. I’ll write all the time. But don’t worry. I know 

 



you: you'll do fine wherever you go." 

"And another thing. I kind of feel like there's something stuck inside 
me. Could it be my imagination?" 

"Just a lingering memory," I said and smiled. Reiko smiled, too. 

"Don't forget about me," she said. 

"I won't forget you," I said. "Ever." 

"We may never meet again, but no matter where I go. I'll always 
remember you and Naoko." 

I saw that she was crying. Before I knew it, I was kissing her. Others 
on the platform were staring at us, but I didn’t care about such things 
any more. We were alive, she and I. And all we had to think about was 
continuing to live. 

"Be happy," Reiko said to me as she boarded the train. "I've given you 
all the advice I have to give. There's nothing left for me to say. Just be 
happy. Take my share and Naoko's and combine them for yourself." 

We held hands for a moment, and then we parted. 

I phoned Midori. 

"I have to talk to you," I said. "I have a million things to talk to you 
about. A million things we have to talk about. All I want in this world 
is you. I want to see you and talk. I want the two of us to begin 
everything from the beginning." 

Midori responded with a long, long silence - the silence of all the 
misty rain in the world falling on all the new-mown lawns of the 
world. Forehead pressed against the glass, I shut my eyes and waited. 
At last, Midori's quiet voice broke the silence: "Where are you now?" 
Where was I now? 

Gripping the receiver, I raised my head and turned to see what lay 
beyond the phone box. Where was I now? I had no idea. No idea at 
all. Where was this place? All that flashed into my eyes were the 
countless shapes of people walking by to nowhere. Again and again I 
called out for Midori from the dead centre of this place that was no place.

 