It was the night before the day fixed for his coronation, and the young King was sitting alone in his beautiful chamber.
His courtiers had all taken their leave of him, bowing their heads to the ground, according to the ceremonious usage of the day, and had retired to the Great Hall of the Palace, to receive a few last lessons from the Professor of Etiquette; there being some of them who had still quite natural manners, which in a courtier is, I need hardly say, a very grave offence.
The lad—for he was only a lad, being but sixteen years of age—was not sorry at their departure, and had flung himself back with a deep sigh of relief on the soft cushions of his embroidered couch, lying there, wild-eyed and open-mouthed, like a brown woodland Faun, or some young animal of the forest newly snared by the hunters.
And, indeed, it was the hunters who had found him, coming upon him almost by chance as, bare-limbed and pipe in hand, he was following the flock of the poor goatherd who had brought him up, and whose son he had always fancied himself to be.
The child of the old King’s only daughter by a secret marriage with one much beneath her in station—a stranger, some said, who, by the wonderful magic of his lute-playing, had made the young Princess love him; while others spoke of an artist from Rimini, to whom the Princess had shown much, perhaps too much honour, and who had suddenly disappeared from the city, leaving his work in the Cathedral unfinished—he had been, when but a week old, stolen away from his mother’s side, as she slept, and given into the charge of a common peasant and his wife, who were without children of their own, and lived in a remote part of the forest, more than a day’s ride from the town.
Grief, or the plague, as the court physician stated, or, as some suggested, a swift Italian poison administered in a cup of spiced wine, slew, within an hour of her wakening, the white girl who had given him birth, and as the trusty messenger who bare the child across his saddle-bow stooped from his weary horse and knocked at the rude door of the goatherd’s hut, the body of the Princess was being lowered into an open grave that had been dug in a deserted churchyard, beyond the city gates, a grave where it was said that another body was also lying, that of a young man of marvellous and foreign beauty, whose hands were tied behind him with a knotted cord, and whose breast was stabbed with many red wounds.
Such, at least, was the story that men whispered to each other.
Certain it was that the old King, when on his deathbed, whether moved by remorse for his great sin, or merely desiring that the kingdom should not pass away from his line, had had the lad sent for, and, in the presence of the Council, had acknowledged him as his heir.
And it seems that from the very first moment of his recognition he had shown signs of that strange passion for beauty that was destined to have so great an influence over his life.
Those who accompanied him to the suite of rooms set apart for his service, often spoke of the cry of pleasure that broke from his lips when he saw the delicate raiment and rich jewels that had been prepared for him, and of the almost fierce joy with which he flung aside his rough leathern tunic and coarse sheepskin cloak.
He missed, indeed, at times the fine freedom of his forest life, and was always apt to chafe at the tedious Court ceremonies that occupied so much of each day, but the wonderful palace—_Joyeuse_, as they called it—of which he now found himself lord, seemed to him to be a new world fresh-fashioned for his delight; and as soon as he could escape from the council-board or audience-chamber, he would run down the great staircase, with its lions of gilt bronze and its steps of bright porphyry, and wander from room to room, and from corridor to corridor, like one who was seeking to find in beauty an anodyne from pain, a sort of restoration from sickness.
Upon these journeys of discovery, as he would call them—and, indeed, they were to him real voyages through a marvellous land, he would sometimes be accompanied by the slim, fair-haired Court pages, with their floating mantles, and gay fluttering ribands; but more often he would be alone, feeling through a certain quick instinct, which was almost a divination, that the secrets of art are best learned in secret, and that Beauty, like Wisdom, loves the lonely worshipper.
Many curious stories were related about him at this period.
It was said that a stout Burgo-master, who had come to deliver a florid oratorical address on behalf of the citizens of the town, had caught sight of him kneeling in real adoration before a great picture that had just been brought from Venice, and that seemed to herald the worship of some new gods.
On another occasion he had been missed for several hours, and after a lengthened search had been discovered in a little chamber in one of the northern turrets of the palace gazing, as one in a trance, at a Greek gem carved with the figure of Adonis.
He had been seen, so the tale ran, pressing his warm lips to the marble brow of an antique statue that had been discovered in the bed of the river on the occasion of the building of the stone bridge, and was inscribed with the name of the Bithynian slave of Hadrian.
He had passed a whole night in noting the effect of the moonlight on a silver image of Endymion.
All rare and costly materials had certainly a great fascination for him, and in his eagerness to procure them he had sent away many merchants, some to traffic for amber with the rough fisher-folk of the north seas, some to Egypt to look for that curious green turquoise which is found only in the tombs of kings, and is said to possess magical properties, some to Persia for silken carpets and painted pottery, and others to India to buy gauze and stained ivory, moonstones and bracelets of jade, sandal-wood and blue enamel and shawls of fine wool.
But what had occupied him most was the robe he was to wear at his coronation, the robe of tissued gold, and the ruby-studded crown, and the sceptre with its rows and rings of pearls.
Indeed, it was of this that he was thinking to-night, as he lay back on his luxurious couch, watching the great pinewood log that was burning itself out on the open hearth.
The designs, which were from the hands of the most famous artists of the time, had been submitted to him many months before, and he had given orders that the artificers were to toil night and day to carry them out, and that the whole world was to be searched for jewels that would be worthy of their work.
He saw himself in fancy standing at the high altar of the cathedral in the fair raiment of a King, and a smile played and lingered about his boyish lips, and lit up with a bright lustre his dark woodland eyes.
After some time he rose from his seat, and leaning against the carved penthouse of the chimney, looked round at the dimly-lit room.
The walls were hung with rich tapestries representing the Triumph of Beauty.
A large press, inlaid with agate and lapis-lazuli, filled one corner, and facing the window stood a curiously wrought cabinet with lacquer panels of powdered and mosaiced gold, on which were placed some delicate goblets of Venetian glass, and a cup of dark-veined onyx.
Pale poppies were broidered on the silk coverlet of the bed, as though they had fallen from the tired hands of sleep, and tall reeds of fluted ivory bare up the velvet canopy, from which great tufts of ostrich plumes sprang, like white foam, to the pallid silver of the fretted ceiling.
A laughing Narcissus in green bronze held a polished mirror above its head.
On the table stood a flat bowl of amethyst.
Outside he could see the huge dome of the cathedral, looming like a bubble over the shadowy houses, and the weary sentinels pacing up and down on the misty terrace by the river.
Far away, in an orchard, a nightingale was singing.
A faint perfume of jasmine came through the open window.
He brushed his brown curls back from his forehead, and taking up a lute, let his fingers stray across the cords.
His heavy eyelids drooped, and a strange languor came over him.
Never before had he felt so keenly, or with such exquisite joy, the magic and the mystery of beautiful things.
When midnight sounded from the clock-tower he touched a bell, and his pages entered and disrobed him with much ceremony, pouring rose-water over his hands, and strewing flowers on his pillow.
A few moments after that they had left the room, he fell asleep.
And as he slept he dreamed a dream, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was standing in a long, low attic, amidst the whir and clatter of many looms.
The meagre daylight peered in through the grated windows, and showed him the gaunt figures of the weavers bending over their cases.
Pale, sickly-looking children were crouched on the huge crossbeams.
As the shuttles dashed through the warp they lifted up the heavy battens, and when the shuttles stopped they let the battens fall and pressed the threads together.
Their faces were pinched with famine, and their thin hands shook and trembled.
Some haggard women were seated at a table sewing.
A horrible odour filled the place.
The air was foul and heavy, and the walls dripped and streamed with damp.
The young King went over to one of the weavers, and stood by him and watched him.
And the weaver looked at him angrily, and said, ‘Why art thou watching me?
Art thou a spy set on us by our master?’  ‘Who is thy master?’ asked the young King.
‘Our master!’ cried the weaver, bitterly.
‘He is a man like myself.
Indeed, there is but this difference between us—that he wears fine clothes while I go in rags, and that while I am weak from hunger he suffers not a little from overfeeding.’  ‘The land is free,’ said the young King, ‘and thou art no man’s slave.’  ‘In war,’ answered the weaver, ‘the strong make slaves of the weak, and in peace the rich make slaves of the poor.
We must work to live, and they give us such mean wages that we die.
We toil for them all day long, and they heap up gold in their coffers, and our children fade away before their time, and the faces of those we love become hard and evil.
We tread out the grapes, and another drinks the wine.
We sow the corn, and our own board is empty.
We have chains, though no eye beholds them; and are slaves, though men call us free.’  ‘Is it so with all?’ he asked,  ‘It is so with all,’ answered the weaver, ‘with the young as well as with the old, with the women as well as with the men, with the little children as well as with those who are stricken in years.
The merchants grind us down, and we must needs do their bidding.
The priest rides by and tells his beads, and no man has care of us.
Through our sunless lanes creeps Poverty with her hungry eyes, and Sin with his sodden face follows close behind her.
Misery wakes us in the morning, and Shame sits with us at night.
But what are these things to thee?
Thou art not one of us.
Thy face is too happy.’  And he turned away scowling, and threw the shuttle across the loom, and the young King saw that it was threaded with a thread of gold.
And a great terror seized upon him, and he said to the weaver, ‘What robe is this that thou art weaving?’  ‘It is the robe for the coronation of the young King,’ he answered; ‘what is that to thee?’  And the young King gave a loud cry and woke, and lo! he was in his own chamber, and through the window he saw the great honey-coloured moon hanging in the dusky air.
And he fell asleep again and dreamed, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was lying on the deck of a huge galley that was being rowed by a hundred slaves.
On a carpet by his side the master of the galley was seated.
He was black as ebony, and his turban was of crimson silk.
Great earrings of silver dragged down the thick lobes of his ears, and in his hands he had a pair of ivory scales.
The slaves were naked, but for a ragged loin-cloth, and each man was chained to his neighbour.
The hot sun beat brightly upon them, and the negroes ran up and down the gangway and lashed them with whips of hide.
They stretched out their lean arms and pulled the heavy oars through the water.
The salt spray flew from the blades.
At last they reached a little bay, and began to take soundings.
A light wind blew from the shore, and covered the deck and the great lateen sail with a fine red dust.
Three Arabs mounted on wild asses rode out and threw spears at them.
The master of the galley took a painted bow in his hand and shot one of them in the throat.
He fell heavily into the surf, and his companions galloped away.
A woman wrapped in a yellow veil followed slowly on a camel, looking back now and then at the dead body.
As soon as they had cast anchor and hauled down the sail, the negroes went into the hold and brought up a long rope-ladder, heavily weighted with lead.
The master of the galley threw it over the side, making the ends fast to two iron stanchions.
Then the negroes seized the youngest of the slaves and knocked his gyves off, and filled his nostrils and his ears with wax, and tied a big stone round his waist.
He crept wearily down the ladder, and disappeared into the sea.
A few bubbles rose where he sank.
Some of the other slaves peered curiously over the side.
At the prow of the galley sat a shark-charmer, beating monotonously upon a drum.
After some time the diver rose up out of the water, and clung panting to the ladder with a pearl in his right hand.
The negroes seized it from him, and thrust him back.
The slaves fell asleep over their oars.
Again and again he came up, and each time that he did so he brought with him a beautiful pearl.
The master of the galley weighed them, and put them into a little bag of green leather.
The young King tried to speak, but his tongue seemed to cleave to the roof of his mouth, and his lips refused to move.
The negroes chattered to each other, and began to quarrel over a string of bright beads.
Two cranes flew round and round the vessel.
Then the diver came up for the last time, and the pearl that he brought with him was fairer than all the pearls of Ormuz, for it was shaped like the full moon, and whiter than the morning star.
But his face was strangely pale, and as he fell upon the deck the blood gushed from his ears and nostrils.
He quivered for a little, and then he was still.
The negroes shrugged their shoulders, and threw the body overboard.
And the master of the galley laughed, and, reaching out, he took the pearl, and when he saw it he pressed it to his forehead and bowed.
‘It shall be,’ he said, ‘for the sceptre of the young King,’ and he made a sign to the negroes to draw up the anchor.
And when the young King heard this he gave a great cry, and woke, and through the window he saw the long grey fingers of the dawn clutching at the fading stars.
And he fell asleep again, and dreamed, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was wandering through a dim wood, hung with strange fruits and with beautiful poisonous flowers.
The adders hissed at him as he went by, and the bright parrots flew screaming from branch to branch.
Huge tortoises lay asleep upon the hot mud.
The trees were full of apes and peacocks.
On and on he went, till he reached the outskirts of the wood, and there he saw an immense multitude of men toiling in the bed of a dried-up river.
They swarmed up the crag like ants.
They dug deep pits in the ground and went down into them.
Some of them cleft the rocks with great axes; others grabbled in the sand.
They tore up the cactus by its roots, and trampled on the scarlet blossoms.
They hurried about, calling to each other, and no man was idle.
From the darkness of a cavern Death and Avarice watched them, and Death said, ‘I am weary; give me a third of them and let me go.’  But Avarice shook her head.
‘They are my servants,’ she answered.
And Death said to her, ‘What hast thou in thy hand?’  ‘I have three grains of corn,’ she answered; ‘what is that to thee?’  ‘Give me one of them,’ cried Death, ‘to plant in my garden; only one of them, and I will go away.’  ‘I will not give thee anything,’ said Avarice, and she hid her hand in the fold of her raiment.
And Death laughed, and took a cup, and dipped it into a pool of water, and out of the cup rose Ague.
She passed through the great multitude, and a third of them lay dead.
A cold mist followed her, and the water-snakes ran by her side.
And when Avarice saw that a third of the multitude was dead she beat her breast and wept.
She beat her barren bosom, and cried aloud.
‘Thou hast slain a third of my servants,’ she cried, ‘get thee gone.
There is war in the mountains of Tartary, and the kings of each side are calling to thee.
The Afghans have slain the black ox, and are marching to battle.
They have beaten upon their shields with their spears, and have put on their helmets of iron.
What is my valley to thee, that thou shouldst tarry in it?
Get thee gone, and come here no more.’  ‘Nay,’ answered Death, ‘but till thou hast given me a grain of corn I will not go.’  But Avarice shut her hand, and clenched her teeth.
‘I will not give thee anything,’ she muttered.
And Death laughed, and took up a black stone, and threw it into the forest, and out of a thicket of wild hemlock came Fever in a robe of flame.
She passed through the multitude, and touched them, and each man that she touched died.
The grass withered beneath her feet as she walked.
And Avarice shuddered, and put ashes on her head.
‘Thou art cruel,’ she cried; ‘thou art cruel.
There is famine in the walled cities of India, and the cisterns of Samarcand have run dry.
There is famine in the walled cities of Egypt, and the locusts have come up from the desert.
The Nile has not overflowed its banks, and the priests have cursed Isis and Osiris.
Get thee gone to those who need thee, and leave me my servants.’  ‘Nay,’ answered Death, ‘but till thou hast given me a grain of corn I will not go.’  ‘I will not give thee anything,’ said Avarice.
And Death laughed again, and he whistled through his fingers, and a woman came flying through the air.
Plague was written upon her forehead, and a crowd of lean vultures wheeled round her.
She covered the valley with her wings, and no man was left alive.
And Avarice fled shrieking through the forest, and Death leaped upon his red horse and galloped away, and his galloping was faster than the wind.
And out of the slime at the bottom of the valley crept dragons and horrible things with scales, and the jackals came trotting along the sand, sniffing up the air with their nostrils.
And the young King wept, and said: ‘Who were these men, and for what were they seeking?’  ‘For rubies for a king’s crown,’ answered one who stood behind him.
And the young King started, and, turning round, he saw a man habited as a pilgrim and holding in his hand a mirror of silver.
And he grew pale, and said: ‘For what king?’  And the pilgrim answered: ‘Look in this mirror, and thou shalt see him.’  And he looked in the mirror, and, seeing his own face, he gave a great cry and woke, and the bright sunlight was streaming into the room, and from the trees of the garden and pleasaunce the birds were singing.
And the Chamberlain and the high officers of State came in and made obeisance to him, and the pages brought him the robe of tissued gold, and set the crown and the sceptre before him.
And the young King looked at them, and they were beautiful.
More beautiful were they than aught that he had ever seen.
But he remembered his dreams, and he said to his lords: ‘Take these things away, for I will not wear them.’  And the courtiers were amazed, and some of them laughed, for they thought that he was jesting.
But he spake sternly to them again, and said: ‘Take these things away, and hide them from me.
Though it be the day of my coronation, I will not wear them.
For on the loom of Sorrow, and by the white hands of Pain, has this my robe been woven.
There is Blood in the heart of the ruby, and Death in the heart of the pearl.’  And he told them his three dreams.
And when the courtiers heard them they looked at each other and whispered, saying: ‘Surely he is mad; for what is a dream but a dream, and a vision but a vision?
They are not real things that one should heed them.
And what have we to do with the lives of those who toil for us?
Shall a man not eat bread till he has seen the sower, nor drink wine till he has talked with the vinedresser?’  And the Chamberlain spake to the young King, and said, ‘My lord, I pray thee set aside these black thoughts of thine, and put on this fair robe, and set this crown upon thy head.
For how shall the people know that thou art a king, if thou hast not a king’s raiment?’  And the young King looked at him.
‘Is it so, indeed?’ he questioned.
‘Will they not know me for a king if I have not a king’s raiment?’  ‘They will not know thee, my lord,’ cried the Chamberlain.
‘I had thought that there had been men who were kinglike,’ he answered, ‘but it may be as thou sayest.
And yet I will not wear this robe, nor will I be crowned with this crown, but even as I came to the palace so will I go forth from it.’  And he bade them all leave him, save one page whom he kept as his companion, a lad a year younger than himself.
Him he kept for his service, and when he had bathed himself in clear water, he opened a great painted chest, and from it he took the leathern tunic and rough sheepskin cloak that he had worn when he had watched on the hillside the shaggy goats of the goatherd.
These he put on, and in his hand he took his rude shepherd’s staff.
And the little page opened his big blue eyes in wonder, and said smiling to him, ‘My lord, I see thy robe and thy sceptre, but where is thy crown?’  And the young King plucked a spray of wild briar that was climbing over the balcony, and bent it, and made a circlet of it, and set it on his own head.
‘This shall he my crown,’ he answered.
And thus attired he passed out of his chamber into the Great Hall, where the nobles were waiting for him.
And the nobles made merry, and some of them cried out to him, ‘My lord, the people wait for their king, and thou showest them a beggar,’ and others were wroth and said, ‘He brings shame upon our state, and is unworthy to be our master.’  But he answered them not a word, but passed on, and went down the bright porphyry staircase, and out through the gates of bronze, and mounted upon his horse, and rode towards the cathedral, the little page running beside him.
And the people laughed and said, ‘It is the King’s fool who is riding by,’ and they mocked him.
And he drew rein and said, ‘Nay, but I am the King.’  And he told them his three dreams.
And a man came out of the crowd and spake bitterly to him, and said, ‘Sir, knowest thou not that out of the luxury of the rich cometh the life of the poor?
By your pomp we are nurtured, and your vices give us bread.
To toil for a hard master is bitter, but to have no master to toil for is more bitter still.
Thinkest thou that the ravens will feed us?
And what cure hast thou for these things?
Wilt thou say to the buyer, “Thou shalt buy for so much,” and to the seller, “Thou shalt sell at this price”?
I trow not.
Therefore go back to thy Palace and put on thy purple and fine linen.
What hast thou to do with us, and what we suffer?’  ‘Are not the rich and the poor brothers?’ asked the young King.
‘Ay,’ answered the man, ‘and the name of the rich brother is Cain.’  And the young King’s eyes filled with tears, and he rode on through the murmurs of the people, and the little page grew afraid and left him.
And when he reached the great portal of the cathedral, the soldiers thrust their halberts out and said, ‘What dost thou seek here?
None enters by this door but the King.’  And his face flushed with anger, and he said to them, ‘I am the King,’ and waved their halberts aside and passed in.
And when the old Bishop saw him coming in his goatherd’s dress, he rose up in wonder from his throne, and went to meet him, and said to him, ‘My son, is this a king’s apparel?
And with what crown shall I crown thee, and what sceptre shall I place in thy hand?
Surely this should be to thee a day of joy, and not a day of abasement.’  ‘Shall Joy wear what Grief has fashioned?’ said the young King.
And he told him his three dreams.
And when the Bishop had heard them he knit his brows, and said, ‘My son, I am an old man, and in the winter of my days, and I know that many evil things are done in the wide world.
The fierce robbers come down from the mountains, and carry off the little children, and sell them to the Moors.
The lions lie in wait for the caravans, and leap upon the camels.
The wild boar roots up the corn in the valley, and the foxes gnaw the vines upon the hill.
The pirates lay waste the sea-coast and burn the ships of the fishermen, and take their nets from them.
In the salt-marshes live the lepers; they have houses of wattled reeds, and none may come nigh them.
The beggars wander through the cities, and eat their food with the dogs.
Canst thou make these things not to be?
Wilt thou take the leper for thy bedfellow, and set the beggar at thy board?
Shall the lion do thy bidding, and the wild boar obey thee?
Is not He who made misery wiser than thou art?
Wherefore I praise thee not for this that thou hast done, but I bid thee ride back to the Palace and make thy face glad, and put on the raiment that beseemeth a king, and with the crown of gold I will crown thee, and the sceptre of pearl will I place in thy hand.
And as for thy dreams, think no more of them.
The burden of this world is too great for one man to bear, and the world’s sorrow too heavy for one heart to suffer.’  ‘Sayest thou that in this house?’ said the young King, and he strode past the Bishop, and climbed up the steps of the altar, and stood before the image of Christ.
He stood before the image of Christ, and on his right hand and on his left were the marvellous vessels of gold, the chalice with the yellow wine, and the vial with the holy oil.
He knelt before the image of Christ, and the great candles burned brightly by the jewelled shrine, and the smoke of the incense curled in thin blue wreaths through the dome.
He bowed his head in prayer, and the priests in their stiff copes crept away from the altar.
And suddenly a wild tumult came from the street outside, and in entered the nobles with drawn swords and nodding plumes, and shields of polished steel.
‘Where is this dreamer of dreams?’ they cried.
‘Where is this King who is apparelled like a beggar—this boy who brings shame upon our state?
Surely we will slay him, for he is unworthy to rule over us.’  And the young King bowed his head again, and prayed, and when he had finished his prayer he rose up, and turning round he looked at them sadly.
And lo! through the painted windows came the sunlight streaming upon him, and the sun-beams wove round him a tissued robe that was fairer than the robe that had been fashioned for his pleasure.
The dead staff blossomed, and bare lilies that were whiter than pearls.
The dry thorn blossomed, and bare roses that were redder than rubies.
Whiter than fine pearls were the lilies, and their stems were of bright silver.
Redder than male rubies were the roses, and their leaves were of beaten gold.
He stood there in the raiment of a king, and the gates of the jewelled shrine flew open, and from the crystal of the many-rayed monstrance shone a marvellous and mystical light.
He stood there in a king’s raiment, and the Glory of God filled the place, and the saints in their carven niches seemed to move.
In the fair raiment of a king he stood before them, and the organ pealed out its music, and the trumpeters blew upon their trumpets, and the singing boys sang.
And the people fell upon their knees in awe, and the nobles sheathed their swords and did homage, and the Bishop’s face grew pale, and his hands trembled.
‘A greater than I hath crowned thee,’ he cried, and he knelt before him.
And the young King came down from the high altar, and passed home through the midst of the people.
But no man dared look upon his face, for it was like the face of an angel.
IT was the birthday of the Infanta.
She was just twelve years of age, and the sun was shining brightly in the gardens of the palace.
Although she was a real Princess and the Infanta of Spain, she had only one birthday every year, just like the children of quite poor people, so it was naturally a matter of great importance to the whole country that she should have a really fine day for the occasion.
And a really fine day it certainly was.
The tall striped tulips stood straight up upon their stalks, like long rows of soldiers, and looked defiantly across the grass at the roses, and said: ‘We are quite as splendid as you are now.’ The purple butterflies fluttered about with gold dust on their wings, visiting each flower in turn; the little lizards crept out of the crevices of the wall, and lay basking in the white glare; and the pomegranates split and cracked with the heat, and showed their bleeding red hearts.
Even the pale yellow lemons, that hung in such profusion from the mouldering trellis and along the dim arcades, seemed to have caught a richer colour from the wonderful sunlight, and the magnolia trees opened their great globe-like blossoms of folded ivory, and filled the air with a sweet heavy perfume.
The little Princess herself walked up and down the terrace with her companions, and played at hide and seek round the stone vases and the old moss-grown statues.
On ordinary days she was only allowed to play with children of her own rank, so she had always to play alone, but her birthday was an exception, and the King had given orders that she was to invite any of her young friends whom she liked to come and amuse themselves with her.
There was a stately grace about these slim Spanish children as they glided about, the boys with their large-plumed hats and short fluttering cloaks, the girls holding up the trains of their long brocaded gowns, and shielding the sun from their eyes with huge fans of black and silver.
But the Infanta was the most graceful of all, and the most tastefully attired, after the somewhat cumbrous fashion of the day.
Her robe was of grey satin, the skirt and the wide puffed sleeves heavily embroidered with silver, and the stiff corset studded with rows of fine pearls.
Two tiny slippers with big pink rosettes peeped out beneath her dress as she walked.
Pink and pearl was her great gauze fan, and in her hair, which like an aureole of faded gold stood out stiffly round her pale little face, she had a beautiful white rose.
From a window in the palace the sad melancholy King watched them.
Behind him stood his brother, Don Pedro of Aragon, whom he hated, and his confessor, the Grand Inquisitor of Granada, sat by his side.
Sadder even than usual was the King, for as he looked at the Infanta bowing with childish gravity to the assembling counters, or laughing behind her fan at the grim Duchess of Albuquerque who always accompanied her, he thought of the young Queen, her mother, who but a short time before—so it seemed to him—had come from the gay country of France, and had withered away in the sombre splendour of the Spanish court, dying just six months after the birth of her child, and before she had seen the almonds blossom twice in the orchard, or plucked the second year’s fruit from the old gnarled fig-tree that stood in the centre of the now grass-grown courtyard.
So great had been his love for her that he had not suffered even the grave to hide her from him.
She had been embalmed by a Moorish physician, who in return for this service had been granted his life, which for heresy and suspicion of magical practices had been already forfeited, men said, to the Holy Office, and her body was still lying on its tapestried bier in the black marble chapel of the Palace, just as the monks had borne her in on that windy March day nearly twelve years before.
Once every month the King, wrapped in a dark cloak and with a muffled lantern in his hand, went in and knelt by her side calling out, ‘_Mi reina_!  _Mi reina_!’ and sometimes breaking through the formal etiquette that in Spain governs every separate action of life, and sets limits even to the sorrow of a King, he would clutch at the pale jewelled hands in a wild agony of grief, and try to wake by his mad kisses the cold painted face.
To-day he seemed to see her again, as he had seen her first at the Castle of Fontainebleau, when he was but fifteen years of age, and she still younger.
They had been formally betrothed on that occasion by the Papal Nuncio in the presence of the French King and all the Court, and he had returned to the Escurial bearing with him a little ringlet of yellow hair, and the memory of two childish lips bending down to kiss his hand as he stepped into his carriage.
Later on had followed the marriage, hastily performed at Burgos, a small town on the frontier between the two countries, and the grand public entry into Madrid with the customary celebration of high mass at the Church of La Atocha, and a more than usually solemn _auto-da-fé_, in which nearly three hundred heretics, amongst whom were many Englishmen, had been delivered over to the secular arm to be burned.
Certainly he had loved her madly, and to the ruin, many thought, of his country, then at war with England for the possession of the empire of the New World.
He had hardly ever permitted her to be out of his sight; for her, he had forgotten, or seemed to have forgotten, all grave affairs of State; and, with that terrible blindness that passion brings upon its servants, he had failed to notice that the elaborate ceremonies by which he sought to please her did but aggravate the strange malady from which she suffered.
When she died he was, for a time, like one bereft of reason.
Indeed, there is no doubt but that he would have formally abdicated and retired to the great Trappist monastery at Granada, of which he was already titular Prior, had he not been afraid to leave the little Infanta at the mercy of his brother, whose cruelty, even in Spain, was notorious, and who was suspected by many of having caused the Queen’s death by means of a pair of poisoned gloves that he had presented to her on the occasion of her visiting his castle in Aragon.
Even after the expiration of the three years of public mourning that he had ordained throughout his whole dominions by royal edict, he would never suffer his ministers to speak about any new alliance, and when the Emperor himself sent to him, and offered him the hand of the lovely Archduchess of Bohemia, his niece, in marriage, he bade the ambassadors tell their master that the King of Spain was already wedded to Sorrow, and that though she was but a barren bride he loved her better than Beauty; an answer that cost his crown the rich provinces of the Netherlands, which soon after, at the Emperor’s instigation, revolted against him under the leadership of some fanatics of the Reformed Church.
His whole married life, with its fierce, fiery-coloured joys and the terrible agony of its sudden ending, seemed to come back to him to-day as he watched the Infanta playing on the terrace.
She had all the Queen’s pretty petulance of manner, the same wilful way of tossing her head, the same proud curved beautiful mouth, the same wonderful smile—_vrai sourire de France_ indeed—as she glanced up now and then at the window, or stretched out her little hand for the stately Spanish gentlemen to kiss.
But the shrill laughter of the children grated on his ears, and the bright pitiless sunlight mocked his sorrow, and a dull odour of strange spices, spices such as embalmers use, seemed to taint—or was it fancy?—the clear morning air.
He buried his face in his hands, and when the Infanta looked up again the curtains had been drawn, and the King had retired.
She made a little _moue_ of disappointment, and shrugged her shoulders.
Surely he might have stayed with her on her birthday.
What did the stupid State-affairs matter?
Or had he gone to that gloomy chapel, where the candles were always burning, and where she was never allowed to enter?
How silly of him, when the sun was shining so brightly, and everybody was so happy!  Besides, he would miss the sham bull-fight for which the trumpet was already sounding, to say nothing of the puppet-show and the other wonderful things.
Her uncle and the Grand Inquisitor were much more sensible.
They had come out on the terrace, and paid her nice compliments.
So she tossed her pretty head, and taking Don Pedro by the hand, she walked slowly down the steps towards a long pavilion of purple silk that had been erected at the end of the garden, the other children following in strict order of precedence, those who had the longest names going first.
A procession of noble boys, fantastically dressed as _toreadors_, came out to meet her, and the young Count of Tierra-Nueva, a wonderfully handsome lad of about fourteen years of age, uncovering his head with all the grace of a born hidalgo and grandee of Spain, led her solemnly in to a little gilt and ivory chair that was placed on a raised dais above the arena.
The children grouped themselves all round, fluttering their big fans and whispering to each other, and Don Pedro and the Grand Inquisitor stood laughing at the entrance.
Even the Duchess—the Camerera-Mayor as she was called—a thin, hard-featured woman with a yellow ruff, did not look quite so bad-tempered as usual, and something like a chill smile flitted across her wrinkled face and twitched her thin bloodless lips.
It certainly was a marvellous bull-fight, and much nicer, the Infanta thought, than the real bull-fight that she had been brought to see at Seville, on the occasion of the visit of the Duke of Parma to her father.
Some of the boys pranced about on richly-caparisoned hobby-horses brandishing long javelins with gay streamers of bright ribands attached to them; others went on foot waving their scarlet cloaks before the bull, and vaulting lightly over the barrier when he charged them; and as for the bull himself, he was just like a live bull, though he was only made of wicker-work and stretched hide, and sometimes insisted on running round the arena on his hind legs, which no live bull ever dreams of doing.
He made a splendid fight of it too, and the children got so excited that they stood up upon the benches, and waved their lace handkerchiefs and cried out: _Bravo toro_!  _Bravo toro_! just as sensibly as if they had been grown-up people.
At last, however, after a prolonged combat, during which several of the hobby-horses were gored through and through, and, their riders dismounted, the young Count of Tierra-Nueva brought the bull to his knees, and having obtained permission from the Infanta to give the _coup de grâce_, he plunged his wooden sword into the neck of the animal with such violence that the head came right off, and disclosed the laughing face of little Monsieur de Lorraine, the son of the French Ambassador at Madrid.
The arena was then cleared amidst much applause, and the dead hobby-horses dragged solemnly away by two Moorish pages in yellow and black liveries, and after a short interlude, during which a French posture-master performed upon the tightrope, some Italian puppets appeared in the semi-classical tragedy of _Sophonisba_ on the stage of a small theatre that had been built up for the purpose.
They acted so well, and their gestures were so extremely natural, that at the close of the play the eyes of the Infanta were quite dim with tears.
Indeed some of the children really cried, and had to be comforted with sweetmeats, and the Grand Inquisitor himself was so affected that he could not help saying to Don Pedro that it seemed to him intolerable that things made simply out of wood and coloured wax, and worked mechanically by wires, should be so unhappy and meet with such terrible misfortunes.
An African juggler followed, who brought in a large flat basket covered with a red cloth, and having placed it in the centre of the arena, he took from his turban a curious reed pipe, and blew through it.
In a few moments the cloth began to move, and as the pipe grew shriller and shriller two green and gold snakes put out their strange wedge-shaped heads and rose slowly up, swaying to and fro with the music as a plant sways in the water.
The children, however, were rather frightened at their spotted hoods and quick darting tongues, and were much more pleased when the juggler made a tiny orange-tree grow out of the sand and bear pretty white blossoms and clusters of real fruit; and when he took the fan of the little daughter of the Marquess de Las-Torres, and changed it into a blue bird that flew all round the pavilion and sang, their delight and amazement knew no bounds.
The solemn minuet, too, performed by the dancing boys from the church of Nuestra Senora Del Pilar, was charming.
The Infanta had never before seen this wonderful ceremony which takes place every year at Maytime in front of the high altar of the Virgin, and in her honour; and indeed none of the royal family of Spain had entered the great cathedral of Saragossa since a mad priest, supposed by many to have been in the pay of Elizabeth of England, had tried to administer a poisoned wafer to the Prince of the Asturias.
So she had known only by hearsay of ‘Our Lady’s Dance,’ as it was called, and it certainly was a beautiful sight.
The boys wore old-fashioned court dresses of white velvet, and their curious three-cornered hats were fringed with silver and surmounted with huge plumes of ostrich feathers, the dazzling whiteness of their costumes, as they moved about in the sunlight, being still more accentuated by their swarthy faces and long black hair.
Everybody was fascinated by the grave dignity with which they moved through the intricate figures of the dance, and by the elaborate grace of their slow gestures, and stately bows, and when they had finished their performance and doffed their great plumed hats to the Infanta, she acknowledged their reverence with much courtesy, and made a vow that she would send a large wax candle to the shrine of Our Lady of Pilar in return for the pleasure that she had given her.
A troop of handsome Egyptians—as the gipsies were termed in those days—then advanced into the arena, and sitting down cross-legs, in a circle, began to play softly upon their zithers, moving their bodies to the tune, and humming, almost below their breath, a low dreamy air.
When they caught sight of Don Pedro they scowled at him, and some of them looked terrified, for only a few weeks before he had had two of their tribe hanged for sorcery in the market-place at Seville, but the pretty Infanta charmed them as she leaned back peeping over her fan with her great blue eyes, and they felt sure that one so lovely as she was could never be cruel to anybody.
So they played on very gently and just touching the cords of the zithers with their long pointed nails, and their heads began to nod as though they were falling asleep.
Suddenly, with a cry so shrill that all the children were startled and Don Pedro’s hand clutched at the agate pommel of his dagger, they leapt to their feet and whirled madly round the enclosure beating their tambourines, and chaunting some wild love-song in their strange guttural language.
Then at another signal they all flung themselves again to the ground and lay there quite still, the dull strumming of the zithers being the only sound that broke the silence.
After that they had done this several times, they disappeared for a moment and came back leading a brown shaggy bear by a chain, and carrying on their shoulders some little Barbary apes.
The bear stood upon his head with the utmost gravity, and the wizened apes played all kinds of amusing tricks with two gipsy boys who seemed to be their masters, and fought with tiny swords, and fired off guns, and went through a regular soldier’s drill just like the King’s own bodyguard.
In fact the gipsies were a great success.
But the funniest part of the whole morning’s entertainment, was undoubtedly the dancing of the little Dwarf.
When he stumbled into the arena, waddling on his crooked legs and wagging his huge misshapen head from side to side, the children went off into a loud shout of delight, and the Infanta herself laughed so much that the Camerera was obliged to remind her that although there were many precedents in Spain for a King’s daughter weeping before her equals, there were none for a Princess of the blood royal making so merry before those who were her inferiors in birth.
The Dwarf, however, was really quite irresistible, and even at the Spanish Court, always noted for its cultivated passion for the horrible, so fantastic a little monster had never been seen.
It was his first appearance, too.
He had been discovered only the day before, running wild through the forest, by two of the nobles who happened to have been hunting in a remote part of the great cork-wood that surrounded the town, and had been carried off by them to the Palace as a surprise for the Infanta; his father, who was a poor charcoal-burner, being but too well pleased to get rid of so ugly and useless a child.
Perhaps the most amusing thing about him was his complete unconsciousness of his own grotesque appearance.
Indeed he seemed quite happy and full of the highest spirits.
When the children laughed, he laughed as freely and as joyously as any of them, and at the close of each dance he made them each the funniest of bows, smiling and nodding at them just as if he was really one of themselves, and not a little misshapen thing that Nature, in some humourous mood, had fashioned for others to mock at.
As for the Infanta, she absolutely fascinated him.
He could not keep his eyes off her, and seemed to dance for her alone, and when at the close of the performance, remembering how she had seen the great ladies of the Court throw bouquets to Caffarelli, the famous Italian treble, whom the Pope had sent from his own chapel to Madrid that he might cure the King’s melancholy by the sweetness of his voice, she took out of her hair the beautiful white rose, and partly for a jest and partly to tease the Camerera, threw it to him across the arena with her sweetest smile, he took the whole matter quite seriously, and pressing the flower to his rough coarse lips he put his hand upon his heart, and sank on one knee before her, grinning from ear to ear, and with his little bright eyes sparkling with pleasure.
This so upset the gravity of the Infanta that she kept on laughing long after the little Dwarf had ran out of the arena, and expressed a desire to her uncle that the dance should be immediately repeated.
The Camerera, however, on the plea that the sun was too hot, decided that it would be better that her Highness should return without delay to the Palace, where a wonderful feast had been already prepared for her, including a real birthday cake with her own initials worked all over it in painted sugar and a lovely silver flag waving from the top.
The Infanta accordingly rose up with much dignity, and having given orders that the little dwarf was to dance again for her after the hour of siesta, and conveyed her thanks to the young Count of Tierra-Nueva for his charming reception, she went back to her apartments, the children following in the same order in which they had entered.
Now when the little Dwarf heard that he was to dance a second time before the Infanta, and by her own express command, he was so proud that he ran out into the garden, kissing the white rose in an absurd ecstasy of pleasure, and making the most uncouth and clumsy gestures of delight.
The Flowers were quite indignant at his daring to intrude into their beautiful home, and when they saw him capering up and down the walks, and waving his arms above his head in such a ridiculous manner, they could not restrain their feelings any longer.
‘He is really far too ugly to be allowed to play in any place where we are,’ cried the Tulips.
‘He should drink poppy-juice, and go to sleep for a thousand years,’ said the great scarlet Lilies, and they grew quite hot and angry.
‘He is a perfect horror!’ screamed the Cactus.
‘Why, he is twisted and stumpy, and his head is completely out of proportion with his legs.
Really he makes me feel prickly all over, and if he comes near me I will sting him with my thorns.’  ‘And he has actually got one of my best blooms,’ exclaimed the White Rose-Tree.
‘I gave it to the Infanta this morning myself, as a birthday present, and he has stolen it from her.’  And she called out: ‘Thief, thief, thief!’ at the top of her voice.
Even the red Geraniums, who did not usually give themselves airs, and were known to have a great many poor relations themselves, curled up in disgust when they saw him, and when the Violets meekly remarked that though he was certainly extremely plain, still he could not help it, they retorted with a good deal of justice that that was his chief defect, and that there was no reason why one should admire a person because he was incurable; and, indeed, some of the Violets themselves felt that the ugliness of the little Dwarf was almost ostentatious, and that he would have shown much better taste if he had looked sad, or at least pensive, instead of jumping about merrily, and throwing himself into such grotesque and silly attitudes.
As for the old Sundial, who was an extremely remarkable individual, and had once told the time of day to no less a person than the Emperor Charles V.
himself, he was so taken aback by the little Dwarf’s appearance, that he almost forgot to mark two whole minutes with his long shadowy finger, and could not help saying to the great milk-white Peacock, who was sunning herself on the balustrade, that every one knew that the children of Kings were Kings, and that the children of charcoal-burners were charcoal-burners, and that it was absurd to pretend that it wasn’t so; a statement with which the Peacock entirely agreed, and indeed screamed out, ‘Certainly, certainly,’ in such a loud, harsh voice, that the gold-fish who lived in the basin of the cool splashing fountain put their heads out of the water, and asked the huge stone Tritons what on earth was the matter.
But somehow the Birds liked him.
They had seen him often in the forest, dancing about like an elf after the eddying leaves, or crouched up in the hollow of some old oak-tree, sharing his nuts with the squirrels.
They did not mind his being ugly, a bit.
Why, even the nightingale herself, who sang so sweetly in the orange groves at night that sometimes the Moon leaned down to listen, was not much to look at after all; and, besides, he had been kind to them, and during that terribly bitter winter, when there were no berries on the trees, and the ground was as hard as iron, and the wolves had come down to the very gates of the city to look for food, he had never once forgotten them, but had always given them crumbs out of his little hunch of black bread, and divided with them whatever poor breakfast he had.
So they flew round and round him, just touching his cheek with their wings as they passed, and chattered to each other, and the little Dwarf was so pleased that he could not help showing them the beautiful white rose, and telling them that the Infanta herself had given it to him because she loved him.
They did not understand a single word of what he was saying, but that made no matter, for they put their heads on one side, and looked wise, which is quite as good as understanding a thing, and very much easier.
The Lizards also took an immense fancy to him, and when he grew tired of running about and flung himself down on the grass to rest, they played and romped all over him, and tried to amuse him in the best way they could.
‘Every one cannot be as beautiful as a lizard,’ they cried; ‘that would be too much to expect.
And, though it sounds absurd to say so, he is really not so ugly after all, provided, of course, that one shuts one’s eyes, and does not look at him.’  The Lizards were extremely philosophical by nature, and often sat thinking for hours and hours together, when there was nothing else to do, or when the weather was too rainy for them to go out.
The Flowers, however, were excessively annoyed at their behaviour, and at the behaviour of the birds.
‘It only shows,’ they said, ‘what a vulgarising effect this incessant rushing and flying about has.
Well-bred people always stay exactly in the same place, as we do.
No one ever saw us hopping up and down the walks, or galloping madly through the grass after dragon-flies.
When we do want change of air, we send for the gardener, and he carries us to another bed.
This is dignified, and as it should be.
But birds and lizards have no sense of repose, and indeed birds have not even a permanent address.
They are mere vagrants like the gipsies, and should be treated in exactly the same manner.’  So they put their noses in the air, and looked very haughty, and were quite delighted when after some time they saw the little Dwarf scramble up from the grass, and make his way across the terrace to the palace.
‘He should certainly be kept indoors for the rest of his natural life,’ they said.
‘Look at his hunched back, and his crooked legs,’ and they began to titter.
But the little Dwarf knew nothing of all this.
He liked the birds and the lizards immensely, and thought that the flowers were the most marvellous things in the whole world, except of course the Infanta, but then she had given him the beautiful white rose, and she loved him, and that made a great difference.
How he wished that he had gone back with her!  She would have put him on her right hand, and smiled at him, and he would have never left her side, but would have made her his playmate, and taught her all kinds of delightful tricks.
For though he had never been in a palace before, he knew a great many wonderful things.
He could make little cages out of rushes for the grasshoppers to sing in, and fashion the long jointed bamboo into the pipe that Pan loves to hear.
He knew the cry of every bird, and could call the starlings from the tree-top, or the heron from the mere.
He knew the trail of every animal, and could track the hare by its delicate footprints, and the boar by the trampled leaves.
All the wild-dances he knew, the mad dance in red raiment with the autumn, the light dance in blue sandals over the corn, the dance with white snow-wreaths in winter, and the blossom-dance through the orchards in spring.
He knew where the wood-pigeons built their nests, and once when a fowler had snared the parent birds, he had brought up the young ones himself, and had built a little dovecot for them in the cleft of a pollard elm.
They were quite tame, and used to feed out of his hands every morning.
She would like them, and the rabbits that scurried about in the long fern, and the jays with their steely feathers and black bills, and the hedgehogs that could curl themselves up into prickly balls, and the great wise tortoises that crawled slowly about, shaking their heads and nibbling at the young leaves.
Yes, she must certainly come to the forest and play with him.
He would give her his own little bed, and would watch outside the window till dawn, to see that the wild horned cattle did not harm her, nor the gaunt wolves creep too near the hut.
And at dawn he would tap at the shutters and wake her, and they would go out and dance together all the day long.
It was really not a bit lonely in the forest.
Sometimes a Bishop rode through on his white mule, reading out of a painted book.
Sometimes in their green velvet caps, and their jerkins of tanned deerskin, the falconers passed by, with hooded hawks on their wrists.
At vintage-time came the grape-treaders, with purple hands and feet, wreathed with glossy ivy and carrying dripping skins of wine; and the charcoal-burners sat round their huge braziers at night, watching the dry logs charring slowly in the fire, and roasting chestnuts in the ashes, and the robbers came out of their caves and made merry with them.
Once, too, he had seen a beautiful procession winding up the long dusty road to Toledo.
The monks went in front singing sweetly, and carrying bright banners and crosses of gold, and then, in silver armour, with matchlocks and pikes, came the soldiers, and in their midst walked three barefooted men, in strange yellow dresses painted all over with wonderful figures, and carrying lighted candles in their hands.
Certainly there was a great deal to look at in the forest, and when she was tired he would find a soft bank of moss for her, or carry her in his arms, for he was very strong, though he knew that he was not tall.
He would make her a necklace of red bryony berries, that would be quite as pretty as the white berries that she wore on her dress, and when she was tired of them, she could throw them away, and he would find her others.
He would bring her acorn-cups and dew-drenched anemones, and tiny glow-worms to be stars in the pale gold of her hair.
But where was she?
He asked the white rose, and it made him no answer.
The whole palace seemed asleep, and even where the shutters had not been closed, heavy curtains had been drawn across the windows to keep out the glare.
He wandered all round looking for some place through which he might gain an entrance, and at last he caught sight of a little private door that was lying open.
He slipped through, and found himself in a splendid hall, far more splendid, he feared, than the forest, there was so much more gilding everywhere, and even the floor was made of great coloured stones, fitted together into a sort of geometrical pattern.
But the little Infanta was not there, only some wonderful white statues that looked down on him from their jasper pedestals, with sad blank eyes and strangely smiling lips.
At the end of the hall hung a richly embroidered curtain of black velvet, powdered with suns and stars, the King’s favourite devices, and broidered on the colour he loved best.
Perhaps she was hiding behind that?
He would try at any rate.
So he stole quietly across, and drew it aside.
No; there was only another room, though a prettier room, he thought, than the one he had just left.
The walls were hung with a many-figured green arras of needle-wrought tapestry representing a hunt, the work of some Flemish artists who had spent more than seven years in its composition.
It had once been the chamber of _Jean le Fou_, as he was called, that mad King who was so enamoured of the chase, that he had often tried in his delirium to mount the huge rearing horses, and to drag down the stag on which the great hounds were leaping, sounding his hunting horn, and stabbing with his dagger at the pale flying deer.
It was now used as the council-room, and on the centre table were lying the red portfolios of the ministers, stamped with the gold tulips of Spain, and with the arms and emblems of the house of Hapsburg.
The little Dwarf looked in wonder all round him, and was half-afraid to go on.
The strange silent horsemen that galloped so swiftly through the long glades without making any noise, seemed to him like those terrible phantoms of whom he had heard the charcoal-burners speaking—the Comprachos, who hunt only at night, and if they meet a man, turn him into a hind, and chase him.
But he thought of the pretty Infanta, and took courage.
He wanted to find her alone, and to tell her that he too loved her.
Perhaps she was in the room beyond.
He ran across the soft Moorish carpets, and opened the door.
No!  She was not here either.
The room was quite empty.
It was a throne-room, used for the reception of foreign ambassadors, when the King, which of late had not been often, consented to give them a personal audience; the same room in which, many years before, envoys had appeared from England to make arrangements for the marriage of their Queen, then one of the Catholic sovereigns of Europe, with the Emperor’s eldest son.
The hangings were of gilt Cordovan leather, and a heavy gilt chandelier with branches for three hundred wax lights hung down from the black and white ceiling.
Underneath a great canopy of gold cloth, on which the lions and towers of Castile were broidered in seed pearls, stood the throne itself, covered with a rich pall of black velvet studded with silver tulips and elaborately fringed with silver and pearls.
On the second step of the throne was placed the kneeling-stool of the Infanta, with its cushion of cloth of silver tissue, and below that again, and beyond the limit of the canopy, stood the chair for the Papal Nuncio, who alone had the right to be seated in the King’s presence on the occasion of any public ceremonial, and whose Cardinal’s hat, with its tangled scarlet tassels, lay on a purple _tabouret_ in front.
On the wall, facing the throne, hung a life-sized portrait of Charles V.
in hunting dress, with a great mastiff by his side, and a picture of Philip II.
receiving the homage of the Netherlands occupied the centre of the other wall.
Between the windows stood a black ebony cabinet, inlaid with plates of ivory, on which the figures from Holbein’s Dance of Death had been graved—by the hand, some said, of that famous master himself.
But the little Dwarf cared nothing for all this magnificence.
He would not have given his rose for all the pearls on the canopy, nor one white petal of his rose for the throne itself.
What he wanted was to see the Infanta before she went down to the pavilion, and to ask her to come away with him when he had finished his dance.
Here, in the Palace, the air was close and heavy, but in the forest the wind blew free, and the sunlight with wandering hands of gold moved the tremulous leaves aside.
There were flowers, too, in the forest, not so splendid, perhaps, as the flowers in the garden, but more sweetly scented for all that; hyacinths in early spring that flooded with waving purple the cool glens, and grassy knolls; yellow primroses that nestled in little clumps round the gnarled roots of the oak-trees; bright celandine, and blue speedwell, and irises lilac and gold.
There were grey catkins on the hazels, and the foxgloves drooped with the weight of their dappled bee-haunted cells.
The chestnut had its spires of white stars, and the hawthorn its pallid moons of beauty.
Yes: surely she would come if he could only find her! She would come with him to the fair forest, and all day long he would dance for her delight.
A smile lit up his eyes at the thought, and he passed into the next room.
Of all the rooms this was the brightest and the most beautiful.
The walls were covered with a pink-flowered Lucca damask, patterned with birds and dotted with dainty blossoms of silver; the furniture was of massive silver, festooned with florid wreaths, and swinging Cupids; in front of the two large fire-places stood great screens broidered with parrots and peacocks, and the floor, which was of sea-green onyx, seemed to stretch far away into the distance.
Nor was he alone.
Standing under the shadow of the doorway, at the extreme end of the room, he saw a little figure watching him.
His heart trembled, a cry of joy broke from his lips, and he moved out into the sunlight.
As he did so, the figure moved out also, and he saw it plainly.
The Infanta!  It was a monster, the most grotesque monster he had ever beheld.
Not properly shaped, as all other people were, but hunchbacked, and crooked-limbed, with huge lolling head and mane of black hair.
The little Dwarf frowned, and the monster frowned also.
He laughed, and it laughed with him, and held its hands to its sides, just as he himself was doing.
He made it a mocking bow, and it returned him a low reverence.
He went towards it, and it came to meet him, copying each step that he made, and stopping when he stopped himself.
He shouted with amusement, and ran forward, and reached out his hand, and the hand of the monster touched his, and it was as cold as ice.
He grew afraid, and moved his hand across, and the monster’s hand followed it quickly.
He tried to press on, but something smooth and hard stopped him.
The face of the monster was now close to his own, and seemed full of terror.
He brushed his hair off his eyes.
It imitated him.
He struck at it, and it returned blow for blow.
He loathed it, and it made hideous faces at him.
He drew back, and it retreated.
What is it?
He thought for a moment, and looked round at the rest of the room.
It was strange, but everything seemed to have its double in this invisible wall of clear water.
Yes, picture for picture was repeated, and couch for couch.
The sleeping Faun that lay in the alcove by the doorway had its twin brother that slumbered, and the silver Venus that stood in the sunlight held out her arms to a Venus as lovely as herself.
Was it Echo?
He had called to her once in the valley, and she had answered him word for word.
Could she mock the eye, as she mocked the voice?
Could she make a mimic world just like the real world?
Could the shadows of things have colour and life and movement?
Could it be that—?
He started, and taking from his breast the beautiful white rose, he turned round, and kissed it.
The monster had a rose of its own, petal for petal the same!  It kissed it with like kisses, and pressed it to its heart with horrible gestures.
When the truth dawned upon him, he gave a wild cry of despair, and fell sobbing to the ground.
So it was he who was misshapen and hunchbacked, foul to look at and grotesque.
He himself was the monster, and it was at him that all the children had been laughing, and the little Princess who he had thought loved him—she too had been merely mocking at his ugliness, and making merry over his twisted limbs.
Why had they not left him in the forest, where there was no mirror to tell him how loathsome he was?
Why had his father not killed him, rather than sell him to his shame?
The hot tears poured down his cheeks, and he tore the white rose to pieces.
The sprawling monster did the same, and scattered the faint petals in the air.
It grovelled on the ground, and, when he looked at it, it watched him with a face drawn with pain.
He crept away, lest he should see it, and covered his eyes with his hands.
He crawled, like some wounded thing, into the shadow, and lay there moaning.
And at that moment the Infanta herself came in with her companions through the open window, and when they saw the ugly little dwarf lying on the ground and beating the floor with his clenched hands, in the most fantastic and exaggerated manner, they went off into shouts of happy laughter, and stood all round him and watched him.
‘His dancing was funny,’ said the Infanta; ‘but his acting is funnier still.
Indeed he is almost as good as the puppets, only of course not quite so natural.’  And she fluttered her big fan, and applauded.
But the little Dwarf never looked up, and his sobs grew fainter and fainter, and suddenly he gave a curious gasp, and clutched his side.
And then he fell back again, and lay quite still.
‘That is capital,’ said the Infanta, after a pause; ‘but now you must dance for me.’  ‘Yes,’ cried all the children, ‘you must get up and dance, for you are as clever as the Barbary apes, and much more ridiculous.’  But the little Dwarf made no answer.
And the Infanta stamped her foot, and called out to her uncle, who was walking on the terrace with the Chamberlain, reading some despatches that had just arrived from Mexico, where the Holy Office had recently been established.
‘My funny little dwarf is sulking,’ she cried, ‘you must wake him up, and tell him to dance for me.’  They smiled at each other, and sauntered in, and Don Pedro stooped down, and slapped the Dwarf on the cheek with his embroidered glove.
‘You must dance,’ he said, ‘_petit monsire_.
You must dance.
The Infanta of Spain and the Indies wishes to be amused.’  But the little Dwarf never moved.
‘A whipping master should be sent for,’ said Don Pedro wearily, and he went back to the terrace.
But the Chamberlain looked grave, and he knelt beside the little dwarf, and put his hand upon his heart.
And after a few moments he shrugged his shoulders, and rose up, and having made a low bow to the Infanta, he said—  ‘_Mi bella Princesa_, your funny little dwarf will never dance again.
It is a pity, for he is so ugly that he might have made the King smile.’  ‘But why will he not dance again?’ asked the Infanta, laughing.
‘Because his heart is broken,’ answered the Chamberlain.
And the Infanta frowned, and her dainty rose-leaf lips curled in pretty disdain.
‘For the future let those who come to play with me have no hearts,’ she cried, and she ran out into the garden.
THE FISHERMAN AND HIS SOUL                                   TO H.S.H.                              ALICE, PRINCESS                                 OF MONACO  EVERY evening the young Fisherman went out upon the sea, and threw his nets into the water.
When the wind blew from the land he caught nothing, or but little at best, for it was a bitter and black-winged wind, and rough waves rose up to meet it.
But when the wind blew to the shore, the fish came in from the deep, and swam into the meshes of his nets, and he took them to the market-place and sold them.
Every evening he went out upon the sea, and one evening the net was so heavy that hardly could he draw it into the boat.
And he laughed, and said to himself, ‘Surely I have caught all the fish that swim, or snared some dull monster that will be a marvel to men, or some thing of horror that the great Queen will desire,’ and putting forth all his strength, he tugged at the coarse ropes till, like lines of blue enamel round a vase of bronze, the long veins rose up on his arms.
He tugged at the thin ropes, and nearer and nearer came the circle of flat corks, and the net rose at last to the top of the water.
But no fish at all was in it, nor any monster or thing of horror, but only a little Mermaid lying fast asleep.
Her hair was as a wet fleece of gold, and each separate hair as a thread of fine gold in a cup of glass.
Her body was as white ivory, and her tail was of silver and pearl.
Silver and pearl was her tail, and the green weeds of the sea coiled round it; and like sea-shells were her ears, and her lips were like sea-coral.
The cold waves dashed over her cold breasts, and the salt glistened upon her eyelids.
So beautiful was she that when the young Fisherman saw her he was filled with wonder, and he put out his hand and drew the net close to him, and leaning over the side he clasped her in his arms.
And when he touched her, she gave a cry like a startled sea-gull, and woke, and looked at him in terror with her mauve-amethyst eyes, and struggled that she might escape.
But he held her tightly to him, and would not suffer her to depart.
And when she saw that she could in no way escape from him, she began to weep, and said, ‘I pray thee let me go, for I am the only daughter of a King, and my father is aged and alone.’  But the young Fisherman answered, ‘I will not let thee go save thou makest me a promise that whenever I call thee, thou wilt come and sing to me, for the fish delight to listen to the song of the Sea-folk, and so shall my nets be full.’  ‘Wilt thou in very truth let me go, if I promise thee this?’ cried the Mermaid.
‘In very truth I will let thee go,’ said the young Fisherman.
So she made him the promise he desired, and sware it by the oath of the Sea-folk.
And he loosened his arms from about her, and she sank down into the water, trembling with a strange fear.
Every evening the young Fisherman went out upon the sea, and called to the Mermaid, and she rose out of the water and sang to him.
Round and round her swam the dolphins, and the wild gulls wheeled above her head.
And she sang a marvellous song.
For she sang of the Sea-folk who drive their flocks from cave to cave, and carry the little calves on their shoulders; of the Tritons who have long green beards, and hairy breasts, and blow through twisted conchs when the King passes by; of the palace of the King which is all of amber, with a roof of clear emerald, and a pavement of bright pearl; and of the gardens of the sea where the great filigrane fans of coral wave all day long, and the fish dart about like silver birds, and the anemones cling to the rocks, and the pinks bourgeon in the ribbed yellow sand.
She sang of the big whales that come down from the north seas and have sharp icicles hanging to their fins; of the Sirens who tell of such wonderful things that the merchants have to stop their ears with wax lest they should hear them, and leap into the water and be drowned; of the sunken galleys with their tall masts, and the frozen sailors clinging to the rigging, and the mackerel swimming in and out of the open portholes; of the little barnacles who are great travellers, and cling to the keels of the ships and go round and round the world; and of the cuttlefish who live in the sides of the cliffs and stretch out their long black arms, and can make night come when they will it.
She sang of the nautilus who has a boat of her own that is carved out of an opal and steered with a silken sail; of the happy Mermen who play upon harps and can charm the great Kraken to sleep; of the little children who catch hold of the slippery porpoises and ride laughing upon their backs; of the Mermaids who lie in the white foam and hold out their arms to the mariners; and of the sea-lions with their curved tusks, and the sea-horses with their floating manes.
And as she sang, all the tunny-fish came in from the deep to listen to her, and the young Fisherman threw his nets round them and caught them, and others he took with a spear.
And when his boat was well-laden, the Mermaid would sink down into the sea, smiling at him.
Yet would she never come near him that he might touch her.
Oftentimes he called to her and prayed of her, but she would not; and when he sought to seize her she dived into the water as a seal might dive, nor did he see her again that day.
And each day the sound of her voice became sweeter to his ears.
So sweet was her voice that he forgot his nets and his cunning, and had no care of his craft.
Vermilion-finned and with eyes of bossy gold, the tunnies went by in shoals, but he heeded them not.
His spear lay by his side unused, and his baskets of plaited osier were empty.
With lips parted, and eyes dim with wonder, he sat idle in his boat and listened, listening till the sea-mists crept round him, and the wandering moon stained his brown limbs with silver.
And one evening he called to her, and said: ‘Little Mermaid, little Mermaid, I love thee.
Take me for thy bridegroom, for I love thee.’  But the Mermaid shook her head.
‘Thou hast a human soul,’ she answered.
‘If only thou wouldst send away thy soul, then could I love thee.’  And the young Fisherman said to himself, ‘Of what use is my soul to me?
I cannot see it.
I may not touch it.
I do not know it.
Surely I will send it away from me, and much gladness shall be mine.’  And a cry of joy broke from his lips, and standing up in the painted boat, he held out his arms to the Mermaid.
‘I will send my soul away,’ he cried, ‘and you shall be my bride, and I will be thy bridegroom, and in the depth of the sea we will dwell together, and all that thou hast sung of thou shalt show me, and all that thou desirest I will do, nor shall our lives be divided.’  And the little Mermaid laughed for pleasure and hid her face in her hands.
‘But how shall I send my soul from me?’ cried the young Fisherman.
‘Tell me how I may do it, and lo! it shall be done.’  ‘Alas!  I know not,’ said the little Mermaid: ‘the Sea-folk have no souls.’  And she sank down into the deep, looking wistfully at him.
Now early on the next morning, before the sun was the span of a man’s hand above the hill, the young Fisherman went to the house of the Priest and knocked three times at the door.
The novice looked out through the wicket, and when he saw who it was, he drew back the latch and said to him, ‘Enter.’  And the young Fisherman passed in, and knelt down on the sweet-smelling rushes of the floor, and cried to the Priest who was reading out of the Holy Book and said to him, ‘Father, I am in love with one of the Sea-folk, and my soul hindereth me from having my desire.
Tell me how I can send my soul away from me, for in truth I have no need of it.
Of what value is my soul to me?
I cannot see it.
I may not touch it.
I do not know it.’  And the Priest beat his breast, and answered, ‘Alack, alack, thou art mad, or hast eaten of some poisonous herb, for the soul is the noblest part of man, and was given to us by God that we should nobly use it.
There is no thing more precious than a human soul, nor any earthly thing that can be weighed with it.
It is worth all the gold that is in the world, and is more precious than the rubies of the kings.
Therefore, my son, think not any more of this matter, for it is a sin that may not be forgiven.
And as for the Sea-folk, they are lost, and they who would traffic with them are lost also.
They are as the beasts of the field that know not good from evil, and for them the Lord has not died.’  The young Fisherman’s eyes filled with tears when he heard the bitter words of the Priest, and he rose up from his knees and said to him, ‘Father, the Fauns live in the forest and are glad, and on the rocks sit the Mermen with their harps of red gold.
Let me be as they are, I beseech thee, for their days are as the days of flowers.
And as for my soul, what doth my soul profit me, if it stand between me and the thing that I love?’  ‘The love of the body is vile,’ cried the Priest, knitting his brows, ‘and vile and evil are the pagan things God suffers to wander through His world.
Accursed be the Fauns of the woodland, and accursed be the singers of the sea!  I have heard them at night-time, and they have sought to lure me from my beads.
They tap at the window, and laugh.
They whisper into my ears the tale of their perilous joys.
They tempt me with temptations, and when I would pray they make mouths at me.
They are lost, I tell thee, they are lost.
For them there is no heaven nor hell, and in neither shall they praise God’s name.’  ‘Father,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘thou knowest not what thou sayest.
Once in my net I snared the daughter of a King.
She is fairer than the morning star, and whiter than the moon.
For her body I would give my soul, and for her love I would surrender heaven.
Tell me what I ask of thee, and let me go in peace.’  ‘Away!  Away!’ cried the Priest: ‘thy leman is lost, and thou shalt be lost with her.’  And he gave him no blessing, but drove him from his door.
And the young Fisherman went down into the market-place, and he walked slowly, and with bowed head, as one who is in sorrow.
And when the merchants saw him coming, they began to whisper to each other, and one of them came forth to meet him, and called him by name, and said to him, ‘What hast thou to sell?’  ‘I will sell thee my soul,’ he answered.
‘I pray thee buy it of me, for I am weary of it.
Of what use is my soul to me?
I cannot see it.
I may not touch it.
I do not know it.’  But the merchants mocked at him, and said, ‘Of what use is a man’s soul to us?
It is not worth a clipped piece of silver.
Sell us thy body for a slave, and we will clothe thee in sea-purple, and put a ring upon thy finger, and make thee the minion of the great Queen.
But talk not of the soul, for to us it is nought, nor has it any value for our service.’  And the young Fisherman said to himself: ‘How strange a thing this is! The Priest telleth me that the soul is worth all the gold in the world, and the merchants say that it is not worth a clipped piece of silver.’ And he passed out of the market-place, and went down to the shore of the sea, and began to ponder on what he should do.
And at noon he remembered how one of his companions, who was a gatherer of samphire, had told him of a certain young Witch who dwelt in a cave at the head of the bay and was very cunning in her witcheries.
And he set to and ran, so eager was he to get rid of his soul, and a cloud of dust followed him as he sped round the sand of the shore.
By the itching of her palm the young Witch knew his coming, and she laughed and let down her red hair.
With her red hair falling around her, she stood at the opening of the cave, and in her hand she had a spray of wild hemlock that was blossoming.
‘What d’ye lack?
What d’ye lack?’ she cried, as he came panting up the steep, and bent down before her.
‘Fish for thy net, when the wind is foul?
I have a little reed-pipe, and when I blow on it the mullet come sailing into the bay.
But it has a price, pretty boy, it has a price.
What d’ye lack?
What d’ye lack?
A storm to wreck the ships, and wash the chests of rich treasure ashore?
I have more storms than the wind has, for I serve one who is stronger than the wind, and with a sieve and a pail of water I can send the great galleys to the bottom of the sea.
But I have a price, pretty boy, I have a price.
What d’ye lack?
What d’ye lack?
I know a flower that grows in the valley, none knows it but I.
It has purple leaves, and a star in its heart, and its juice is as white as milk.
Shouldst thou touch with this flower the hard lips of the Queen, she would follow thee all over the world.
Out of the bed of the King she would rise, and over the whole world she would follow thee.
And it has a price, pretty boy, it has a price.
What d’ye lack?
What d’ye lack?
I can pound a toad in a mortar, and make broth of it, and stir the broth with a dead man’s hand.
Sprinkle it on thine enemy while he sleeps, and he will turn into a black viper, and his own mother will slay him.
With a wheel I can draw the Moon from heaven, and in a crystal I can show thee Death.
What d’ye lack?
What d’ye lack?
Tell me thy desire, and I will give it thee, and thou shalt pay me a price, pretty boy, thou shalt pay me a price.’  ‘My desire is but for a little thing,’ said the young Fisherman, ‘yet hath the Priest been wroth with me, and driven me forth.
It is but for a little thing, and the merchants have mocked at me, and denied me.
Therefore am I come to thee, though men call thee evil, and whatever be thy price I shall pay it.’  ‘What wouldst thou?’ asked the Witch, coming near to him.
‘I would send my soul away from me,’ answered the young Fisherman.
The Witch grew pale, and shuddered, and hid her face in her blue mantle.
‘Pretty boy, pretty boy,’ she muttered, ‘that is a terrible thing to do.’  He tossed his brown curls and laughed.
‘My soul is nought to me,’ he answered.
‘I cannot see it.
I may not touch it.
I do not know it.’  ‘What wilt thou give me if I tell thee?’ asked the Witch, looking down at him with her beautiful eyes.
‘Five pieces of gold,’ he said, ‘and my nets, and the wattled house where I live, and the painted boat in which I sail.
Only tell me how to get rid of my soul, and I will give thee all that I possess.’  She laughed mockingly at him, and struck him with the spray of hemlock.
‘I can turn the autumn leaves into gold,’ she answered, ‘and I can weave the pale moonbeams into silver if I will it.
He whom I serve is richer than all the kings of this world, and has their dominions.’  ‘What then shall I give thee,’ he cried, ‘if thy price be neither gold nor silver?’  The Witch stroked his hair with her thin white hand.
‘Thou must dance with me, pretty boy,’ she murmured, and she smiled at him as she spoke.
‘Nought but that?’ cried the young Fisherman in wonder and he rose to his feet.
‘Nought but that,’ she answered, and she smiled at him again.
‘Then at sunset in some secret place we shall dance together,’ he said, ‘and after that we have danced thou shalt tell me the thing which I desire to know.’  She shook her head.
‘When the moon is full, when the moon is full,’ she muttered.
Then she peered all round, and listened.
A blue bird rose screaming from its nest and circled over the dunes, and three spotted birds rustled through the coarse grey grass and whistled to each other.
There was no other sound save the sound of a wave fretting the smooth pebbles below.
So she reached out her hand, and drew him near to her and put her dry lips close to his ear.
‘To-night thou must come to the top of the mountain,’ she whispered.
‘It is a Sabbath, and He will be there.’  The young Fisherman started and looked at her, and she showed her white teeth and laughed.
‘Who is He of whom thou speakest?’ he asked.
‘It matters not,’ she answered.
‘Go thou to-night, and stand under the branches of the hornbeam, and wait for my coming.
If a black dog run towards thee, strike it with a rod of willow, and it will go away.
If an owl speak to thee, make it no answer.
When the moon is full I shall be with thee, and we will dance together on the grass.’  ‘But wilt thou swear to me to tell me how I may send my soul from me?’ he made question.
She moved out into the sunlight, and through her red hair rippled the wind.
‘By the hoofs of the goat I swear it,’ she made answer.
‘Thou art the best of the witches,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘and I will surely dance with thee to-night on the top of the mountain.
I would indeed that thou hadst asked of me either gold or silver.
But such as thy price is thou shalt have it, for it is but a little thing.’  And he doffed his cap to her, and bent his head low, and ran back to the town filled with a great joy.
And the Witch watched him as he went, and when he had passed from her sight she entered her cave, and having taken a mirror from a box of carved cedarwood, she set it up on a frame, and burned vervain on lighted charcoal before it, and peered through the coils of the smoke.
And after a time she clenched her hands in anger.
‘He should have been mine,’ she muttered, ‘I am as fair as she is.’                                        And that evening, when the moon had risen, the young Fisherman climbed up to the top of the mountain, and stood under the branches of the hornbeam.
Like a targe of polished metal the round sea lay at his feet, and the shadows of the fishing-boats moved in the little bay.
A great owl, with yellow sulphurous eyes, called to him by his name, but he made it no answer.
A black dog ran towards him and snarled.
He struck it with a rod of willow, and it went away whining.
At midnight the witches came flying through the air like bats.
‘Phew!’ they cried, as they lit upon the ground, ‘there is some one here we know not!’ and they sniffed about, and chattered to each other, and made signs.
Last of all came the young Witch, with her red hair streaming in the wind.
She wore a dress of gold tissue embroidered with peacocks’ eyes, and a little cap of green velvet was on her head.
‘Where is he, where is he?’ shrieked the witches when they saw her, but she only laughed, and ran to the hornbeam, and taking the Fisherman by the hand she led him out into the moonlight and began to dance.
Round and round they whirled, and the young Witch jumped so high that he could see the scarlet heels of her shoes.
Then right across the dancers came the sound of the galloping of a horse, but no horse was to be seen, and he felt afraid.
‘Faster,’ cried the Witch, and she threw her arms about his neck, and her breath was hot upon his face.
‘Faster, faster!’ she cried, and the earth seemed to spin beneath his feet, and his brain grew troubled, and a great terror fell on him, as of some evil thing that was watching him, and at last he became aware that under the shadow of a rock there was a figure that had not been there before.
It was a man dressed in a suit of black velvet, cut in the Spanish fashion.
His face was strangely pale, but his lips were like a proud red flower.
He seemed weary, and was leaning back toying in a listless manner with the pommel of his dagger.
On the grass beside him lay a plumed hat, and a pair of riding-gloves gauntleted with gilt lace, and sewn with seed-pearls wrought into a curious device.
A short cloak lined with sables hang from his shoulder, and his delicate white hands were gemmed with rings.
Heavy eyelids drooped over his eyes.
The young Fisherman watched him, as one snared in a spell.
At last their eyes met, and wherever he danced it seemed to him that the eyes of the man were upon him.
He heard the Witch laugh, and caught her by the waist, and whirled her madly round and round.
Suddenly a dog bayed in the wood, and the dancers stopped, and going up two by two, knelt down, and kissed the man’s hands.
As they did so, a little smile touched his proud lips, as a bird’s wing touches the water and makes it laugh.
But there was disdain in it.
He kept looking at the young Fisherman.
‘Come! let us worship,’ whispered the Witch, and she led him up, and a great desire to do as she besought him seized on him, and he followed her.
But when he came close, and without knowing why he did it, he made on his breast the sign of the Cross, and called upon the holy name.
No sooner had he done so than the witches screamed like hawks and flew away, and the pallid face that had been watching him twitched with a spasm of pain.
The man went over to a little wood, and whistled.
A jennet with silver trappings came running to meet him.
As he leapt upon the saddle he turned round, and looked at the young Fisherman sadly.
And the Witch with the red hair tried to fly away also, but the Fisherman caught her by her wrists, and held her fast.
‘Loose me,’ she cried, ‘and let me go.
For thou hast named what should not be named, and shown the sign that may not be looked at.’  ‘Nay,’ he answered, ‘but I will not let thee go till thou hast told me the secret.’  ‘What secret?’ said the Witch, wrestling with him like a wild cat, and biting her foam-flecked lips.
‘Thou knowest,’ he made answer.
Her grass-green eyes grew dim with tears, and she said to the Fisherman, ‘Ask me anything but that!’  He laughed, and held her all the more tightly.
And when she saw that she could not free herself, she whispered to him, ‘Surely I am as fair as the daughters of the sea, and as comely as those that dwell in the blue waters,’ and she fawned on him and put her face close to his.
But he thrust her back frowning, and said to her, ‘If thou keepest not the promise that thou madest to me I will slay thee for a false witch.’  She grew grey as a blossom of the Judas tree, and shuddered.
‘Be it so,’ she muttered.
‘It is thy soul and not mine.
Do with it as thou wilt.’ And she took from her girdle a little knife that had a handle of green viper’s skin, and gave it to him.
‘What shall this serve me?’ he asked of her, wondering.
She was silent for a few moments, and a look of terror came over her face.
Then she brushed her hair back from her forehead, and smiling strangely she said to him, ‘What men call the shadow of the body is not the shadow of the body, but is the body of the soul.
Stand on the sea-shore with thy back to the moon, and cut away from around thy feet thy shadow, which is thy soul’s body, and bid thy soul leave thee, and it will do so.’  The young Fisherman trembled.
‘Is this true?’ he murmured.
‘It is true, and I would that I had not told thee of it,’ she cried, and she clung to his knees weeping.
He put her from him and left her in the rank grass, and going to the edge of the mountain he placed the knife in his belt and began to climb down.
And his Soul that was within him called out to him and said, ‘Lo!  I have dwelt with thee for all these years, and have been thy servant.
Send me not away from thee now, for what evil have I done thee?’  And the young Fisherman laughed.
‘Thou hast done me no evil, but I have no need of thee,’ he answered.
‘The world is wide, and there is Heaven also, and Hell, and that dim twilight house that lies between.
Go wherever thou wilt, but trouble me not, for my love is calling to me.’  And his Soul besought him piteously, but he heeded it not, but leapt from crag to crag, being sure-footed as a wild goat, and at last he reached the level ground and the yellow shore of the sea.
Bronze-limbed and well-knit, like a statue wrought by a Grecian, he stood on the sand with his back to the moon, and out of the foam came white arms that beckoned to him, and out of the waves rose dim forms that did him homage.
Before him lay his shadow, which was the body of his soul, and behind him hung the moon in the honey-coloured air.
And his Soul said to him, ‘If indeed thou must drive me from thee, send me not forth without a heart.
The world is cruel, give me thy heart to take with me.’  He tossed his head and smiled.
‘With what should I love my love if I gave thee my heart?’ he cried.
‘Nay, but be merciful,’ said his Soul: ‘give me thy heart, for the world is very cruel, and I am afraid.’  ‘My heart is my love’s,’ he answered, ‘therefore tarry not, but get thee gone.’  ‘Should I not love also?’ asked his Soul.
‘Get thee gone, for I have no need of thee,’ cried the young Fisherman, and he took the little knife with its handle of green viper’s skin, and cut away his shadow from around his feet, and it rose up and stood before him, and looked at him, and it was even as himself.
He crept back, and thrust the knife into his belt, and a feeling of awe came over him.
‘Get thee gone,’ he murmured, ‘and let me see thy face no more.’  ‘Nay, but we must meet again,’ said the Soul.
Its voice was low and flute-like, and its lips hardly moved while it spake.
‘How shall we meet?’ cried the young Fisherman.
‘Thou wilt not follow me into the depths of the sea?’  ‘Once every year I will come to this place, and call to thee,’ said the Soul.
‘It may be that thou wilt have need of me.’  ‘What need should I have of thee?’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘but be it as thou wilt,’ and he plunged into the waters and the Tritons blew their horns and the little Mermaid rose up to meet him, and put her arms around his neck and kissed him on the mouth.
And the Soul stood on the lonely beach and watched them.
And when they had sunk down into the sea, it went weeping away over the marshes.
And after a year was over the Soul came down to the shore of the sea and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep, and said, ‘Why dost thou call to me?’  And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have seen marvellous things.’  So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘When I left thee I turned my face to the East and journeyed.
From the East cometh everything that is wise.
Six days I journeyed, and on the morning of the seventh day I came to a hill that is in the country of the Tartars.
I sat down under the shade of a tamarisk tree to shelter myself from the sun.
The land was dry and burnt up with the heat.
The people went to and fro over the plain like flies crawling upon a disk of polished copper.
‘When it was noon a cloud of red dust rose up from the flat rim of the land.
When the Tartars saw it, they strung their painted bows, and having leapt upon their little horses they galloped to meet it.
The women fled screaming to the waggons, and hid themselves behind the felt curtains.
‘At twilight the Tartars returned, but five of them were missing, and of those that came back not a few had been wounded.
They harnessed their horses to the waggons and drove hastily away.
Three jackals came out of a cave and peered after them.
Then they sniffed up the air with their nostrils, and trotted off in the opposite direction.
‘When the moon rose I saw a camp-fire burning on the plain, and went towards it.
A company of merchants were seated round it on carpets.
Their camels were picketed behind them, and the negroes who were their servants were pitching tents of tanned skin upon the sand, and making a high wall of the prickly pear.
‘As I came near them, the chief of the merchants rose up and drew his sword, and asked me my business.
‘I answered that I was a Prince in my own land, and that I had escaped from the Tartars, who had sought to make me their slave.
The chief smiled, and showed me five heads fixed upon long reeds of bamboo.
‘Then he asked me who was the prophet of God, and I answered him Mohammed.
‘When he heard the name of the false prophet, he bowed and took me by the hand, and placed me by his side.
A negro brought me some mare’s milk in a wooden dish, and a piece of lamb’s flesh roasted.
‘At daybreak we started on our journey.
I rode on a red-haired camel by the side of the chief, and a runner ran before us carrying a spear.
The men of war were on either hand, and the mules followed with the merchandise.
There were forty camels in the caravan, and the mules were twice forty in number.
‘We went from the country of the Tartars into the country of those who curse the Moon.
We saw the Gryphons guarding their gold on the white rocks, and the scaled Dragons sleeping in their caves.
As we passed over the mountains we held our breath lest the snows might fall on us, and each man tied a veil of gauze before his eyes.
As we passed through the valleys the Pygmies shot arrows at us from the hollows of the trees, and at night-time we heard the wild men beating on their drums.
When we came to the Tower of Apes we set fruits before them, and they did not harm us.
When we came to the Tower of Serpents we gave them warm milk in howls of brass, and they let us go by.
Three times in our journey we came to the banks of the Oxus.
We crossed it on rafts of wood with great bladders of blown hide.
The river-horses raged against us and sought to slay us.
When the camels saw them they trembled.
‘The kings of each city levied tolls on us, but would not suffer us to enter their gates.
They threw us bread over the walls, little maize-cakes baked in honey and cakes of fine flour filled with dates.
For every hundred baskets we gave them a bead of amber.
‘When the dwellers in the villages saw us coming, they poisoned the wells and fled to the hill-summits.
We fought with the Magadae who are born old, and grow younger and younger every year, and die when they are little children; and with the Laktroi who say that they are the sons of tigers, and paint themselves yellow and black; and with the Aurantes who bury their dead on the tops of trees, and themselves live in dark caverns lest the Sun, who is their god, should slay them; and with the Krimnians who worship a crocodile, and give it earrings of green glass, and feed it with butter and fresh fowls; and with the Agazonbae, who are dog-faced; and with the Sibans, who have horses’ feet, and run more swiftly than horses.
A third of our company died in battle, and a third died of want.
The rest murmured against me, and said that I had brought them an evil fortune.
I took a horned adder from beneath a stone and let it sting me.
When they saw that I did not sicken they grew afraid.
‘In the fourth month we reached the city of Illel.
It was night-time when we came to the grove that is outside the walls, and the air was sultry, for the Moon was travelling in Scorpion.
We took the ripe pomegranates from the trees, and brake them, and drank their sweet juices.
Then we lay down on our carpets, and waited for the dawn.
‘And at dawn we rose and knocked at the gate of the city.
It was wrought out of red bronze, and carved with sea-dragons and dragons that have wings.
The guards looked down from the battlements and asked us our business.
The interpreter of the caravan answered that we had come from the island of Syria with much merchandise.
They took hostages, and told us that they would open the gate to us at noon, and bade us tarry till then.
‘When it was noon they opened the gate, and as we entered in the people came crowding out of the houses to look at us, and a crier went round the city crying through a shell.
We stood in the market-place, and the negroes uncorded the bales of figured cloths and opened the carved chests of sycamore.
And when they had ended their task, the merchants set forth their strange wares, the waxed linen from Egypt and the painted linen from the country of the Ethiops, the purple sponges from Tyre and the blue hangings from Sidon, the cups of cold amber and the fine vessels of glass and the curious vessels of burnt clay.
From the roof of a house a company of women watched us.
One of them wore a mask of gilded leather.
‘And on the first day the priests came and bartered with us, and on the second day came the nobles, and on the third day came the craftsmen and the slaves.
And this is their custom with all merchants as long as they tarry in the city.
‘And we tarried for a moon, and when the moon was waning, I wearied and wandered away through the streets of the city and came to the garden of its god.
The priests in their yellow robes moved silently through the green trees, and on a pavement of black marble stood the rose-red house in which the god had his dwelling.
Its doors were of powdered lacquer, and bulls and peacocks were wrought on them in raised and polished gold.
The tilted roof was of sea-green porcelain, and the jutting eaves were festooned with little bells.
When the white doves flew past, they struck the bells with their wings and made them tinkle.
‘In front of the temple was a pool of clear water paved with veined onyx.
I lay down beside it, and with my pale fingers I touched the broad leaves.
One of the priests came towards me and stood behind me.
He had sandals on his feet, one of soft serpent-skin and the other of birds’ plumage.
On his head was a mitre of black felt decorated with silver crescents.
Seven yellows were woven into his robe, and his frizzed hair was stained with antimony.
‘After a little while he spake to me, and asked me my desire.
‘I told him that my desire was to see the god.
‘“The god is hunting,” said the priest, looking strangely at me with his small slanting eyes.
‘“Tell me in what forest, and I will ride with him,” I answered.
‘He combed out the soft fringes of his tunic with his long pointed nails.
“The god is asleep,” he murmured.
‘“Tell me on what couch, and I will watch by him,” I answered.
‘“The god is at the feast,” he cried.
‘“If the wine be sweet I will drink it with him, and if it be bitter I will drink it with him also,” was my answer.
‘He bowed his head in wonder, and, taking me by the hand, he raised me up, and led me into the temple.
‘And in the first chamber I saw an idol seated on a throne of jasper bordered with great orient pearls.
It was carved out of ebony, and in stature was of the stature of a man.
On its forehead was a ruby, and thick oil dripped from its hair on to its thighs.
Its feet were red with the blood of a newly-slain kid, and its loins girt with a copper belt that was studded with seven beryls.
‘And I said to the priest, “Is this the god?”  And he answered me, “This is the god.”  ‘“Show me the god,” I cried, “or I will surely slay thee.”  And I touched his hand, and it became withered.
‘And the priest besought me, saying, “Let my lord heal his servant, and I will show him the god.”  ‘So I breathed with my breath upon his hand, and it became whole again, and he trembled and led me into the second chamber, and I saw an idol standing on a lotus of jade hung with great emeralds.
It was carved out of ivory, and in stature was twice the stature of a man.
On its forehead was a chrysolite, and its breasts were smeared with myrrh and cinnamon.
In one hand it held a crooked sceptre of jade, and in the other a round crystal.
It ware buskins of brass, and its thick neck was circled with a circle of selenites.
‘And I said to the priest, “Is this the god?”  ‘And he answered me, “This is the god.”  ‘“Show me the god,” I cried, “or I will surely slay thee.”  And I touched his eyes, and they became blind.
‘And the priest besought me, saying, “Let my lord heal his servant, and I will show him the god.”  ‘So I breathed with my breath upon his eyes, and the sight came back to them, and he trembled again, and led me into the third chamber, and lo! there was no idol in it, nor image of any kind, but only a mirror of round metal set on an altar of stone.
‘And I said to the priest, “Where is the god?”  ‘And he answered me: “There is no god but this mirror that thou seest, for this is the Mirror of Wisdom.
And it reflecteth all things that are in heaven and on earth, save only the face of him who looketh into it.
This it reflecteth not, so that he who looketh into it may be wise.
Many other mirrors are there, but they are mirrors of Opinion.
This only is the Mirror of Wisdom.
And they who possess this mirror know everything, nor is there anything hidden from them.
And they who possess it not have not Wisdom.
Therefore is it the god, and we worship it.”  And I looked into the mirror, and it was even as he had said to me.
‘And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a valley that is but a day’s journey from this place have I hidden the Mirror of Wisdom.
Do but suffer me to enter into thee again and be thy servant, and thou shalt be wiser than all the wise men, and Wisdom shall be thine.
Suffer me to enter into thee, and none will be as wise as thou.’  But the young Fisherman laughed.
‘Love is better than Wisdom,’ he cried, ‘and the little Mermaid loves me.’  ‘Nay, but there is nothing better than Wisdom,’ said the Soul.
‘Love is better,’ answered the young Fisherman, and he plunged into the deep, and the Soul went weeping away over the marshes.
And after the second year was over, the Soul came down to the shore of the sea, and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep and said, ‘Why dost thou call to me?’  And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have seen marvellous things.’  So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘When I left thee, I turned my face to the South and journeyed.
From the South cometh everything that is precious.
Six days I journeyed along the highways that lead to the city of Ashter, along the dusty red-dyed highways by which the pilgrims are wont to go did I journey, and on the morning of the seventh day I lifted up my eyes, and lo! the city lay at my feet, for it is in a valley.
‘There are nine gates to this city, and in front of each gate stands a bronze horse that neighs when the Bedouins come down from the mountains.
The walls are cased with copper, and the watch-towers on the walls are roofed with brass.
In every tower stands an archer with a bow in his hand.
At sunrise he strikes with an arrow on a gong, and at sunset he blows through a horn of horn.
‘When I sought to enter, the guards stopped me and asked of me who I was.
I made answer that I was a Dervish and on my way to the city of Mecca, where there was a green veil on which the Koran was embroidered in silver letters by the hands of the angels.
They were filled with wonder, and entreated me to pass in.
‘Inside it is even as a bazaar.
Surely thou shouldst have been with me.
Across the narrow streets the gay lanterns of paper flutter like large butterflies.
When the wind blows over the roofs they rise and fall as painted bubbles do.
In front of their booths sit the merchants on silken carpets.
They have straight black beards, and their turbans are covered with golden sequins, and long strings of amber and carved peach-stones glide through their cool fingers.
Some of them sell galbanum and nard, and curious perfumes from the islands of the Indian Sea, and the thick oil of red roses, and myrrh and little nail-shaped cloves.
When one stops to speak to them, they throw pinches of frankincense upon a charcoal brazier and make the air sweet.
I saw a Syrian who held in his hands a thin rod like a reed.
Grey threads of smoke came from it, and its odour as it burned was as the odour of the pink almond in spring.
Others sell silver bracelets embossed all over with creamy blue turquoise stones, and anklets of brass wire fringed with little pearls, and tigers’ claws set in gold, and the claws of that gilt cat, the leopard, set in gold also, and earrings of pierced emerald, and finger-rings of hollowed jade.
From the tea-houses comes the sound of the guitar, and the opium-smokers with their white smiling faces look out at the passers-by.
‘Of a truth thou shouldst have been with me.
The wine-sellers elbow their way through the crowd with great black skins on their shoulders.
Most of them sell the wine of Schiraz, which is as sweet as honey.
They serve it in little metal cups and strew rose leaves upon it.
In the market-place stand the fruitsellers, who sell all kinds of fruit: ripe figs, with their bruised purple flesh, melons, smelling of musk and yellow as topazes, citrons and rose-apples and clusters of white grapes, round red-gold oranges, and oval lemons of green gold.
Once I saw an elephant go by.
Its trunk was painted with vermilion and turmeric, and over its ears it had a net of crimson silk cord.
It stopped opposite one of the booths and began eating the oranges, and the man only laughed.
Thou canst not think how strange a people they are.
When they are glad they go to the bird-sellers and buy of them a caged bird, and set it free that their joy may be greater, and when they are sad they scourge themselves with thorns that their sorrow may not grow less.
‘One evening I met some negroes carrying a heavy palanquin through the bazaar.
It was made of gilded bamboo, and the poles were of vermilion lacquer studded with brass peacocks.
Across the windows hung thin curtains of muslin embroidered with beetles’ wings and with tiny seed-pearls, and as it passed by a pale-faced Circassian looked out and smiled at me.
I followed behind, and the negroes hurried their steps and scowled.
But I did not care.
I felt a great curiosity come over me.
‘At last they stopped at a square white house.
There were no windows to it, only a little door like the door of a tomb.
They set down the palanquin and knocked three times with a copper hammer.
An Armenian in a caftan of green leather peered through the wicket, and when he saw them he opened, and spread a carpet on the ground, and the woman stepped out.
As she went in, she turned round and smiled at me again.
I had never seen any one so pale.
‘When the moon rose I returned to the same place and sought for the house, but it was no longer there.
When I saw that, I knew who the woman was, and wherefore she had smiled at me.
‘Certainly thou shouldst have been with me.
On the feast of the New Moon the young Emperor came forth from his palace and went into the mosque to pray.
His hair and beard were dyed with rose-leaves, and his cheeks were powdered with a fine gold dust.
The palms of his feet and hands were yellow with saffron.
‘At sunrise he went forth from his palace in a robe of silver, and at sunset he returned to it again in a robe of gold.
The people flung themselves on the ground and hid their faces, but I would not do so.
I stood by the stall of a seller of dates and waited.
When the Emperor saw me, he raised his painted eyebrows and stopped.
I stood quite still, and made him no obeisance.
The people marvelled at my boldness, and counselled me to flee from the city.
I paid no heed to them, but went and sat with the sellers of strange gods, who by reason of their craft are abominated.
When I told them what I had done, each of them gave me a god and prayed me to leave them.
‘That night, as I lay on a cushion in the tea-house that is in the Street of Pomegranates, the guards of the Emperor entered and led me to the palace.
As I went in they closed each door behind me, and put a chain across it.
Inside was a great court with an arcade running all round.
The walls were of white alabaster, set here and there with blue and green tiles.
The pillars were of green marble, and the pavement of a kind of peach-blossom marble.
I had never seen anything like it before.
‘As I passed across the court two veiled women looked down from a balcony and cursed me.
The guards hastened on, and the butts of the lances rang upon the polished floor.
They opened a gate of wrought ivory, and I found myself in a watered garden of seven terraces.
It was planted with tulip-cups and moonflowers, and silver-studded aloes.
Like a slim reed of crystal a fountain hung in the dusky air.
The cypress-trees were like burnt-out torches.
From one of them a nightingale was singing.
‘At the end of the garden stood a little pavilion.
As we approached it two eunuchs came out to meet us.
Their fat bodies swayed as they walked, and they glanced curiously at me with their yellow-lidded eyes.
One of them drew aside the captain of the guard, and in a low voice whispered to him.
The other kept munching scented pastilles, which he took with an affected gesture out of an oval box of lilac enamel.
‘After a few moments the captain of the guard dismissed the soldiers.
They went back to the palace, the eunuchs following slowly behind and plucking the sweet mulberries from the trees as they passed.
Once the elder of the two turned round, and smiled at me with an evil smile.
‘Then the captain of the guard motioned me towards the entrance of the pavilion.
I walked on without trembling, and drawing the heavy curtain aside I entered in.
‘The young Emperor was stretched on a couch of dyed lion skins, and a gerfalcon perched upon his wrist.
Behind him stood a brass-turbaned Nubian, naked down to the waist, and with heavy earrings in his split ears.
On a table by the side of the couch lay a mighty scimitar of steel.
‘When the Emperor saw me he frowned, and said to me, “What is thy name?
Knowest thou not that I am Emperor of this city?”  But I made him no answer.
‘He pointed with his finger at the scimitar, and the Nubian seized it, and rushing forward struck at me with great violence.
The blade whizzed through me, and did me no hurt.
The man fell sprawling on the floor, and when he rose up his teeth chattered with terror and he hid himself behind the couch.
‘The Emperor leapt to his feet, and taking a lance from a stand of arms, he threw it at me.
I caught it in its flight, and brake the shaft into two pieces.
He shot at me with an arrow, but I held up my hands and it stopped in mid-air.
Then he drew a dagger from a belt of white leather, and stabbed the Nubian in the throat lest the slave should tell of his dishonour.
The man writhed like a trampled snake, and a red foam bubbled from his lips.
‘As soon as he was dead the Emperor turned to me, and when he had wiped away the bright sweat from his brow with a little napkin of purfled and purple silk, he said to me, “Art thou a prophet, that I may not harm thee, or the son of a prophet, that I can do thee no hurt?
I pray thee leave my city to-night, for while thou art in it I am no longer its lord.”  ‘And I answered him, “I will go for half of thy treasure.
Give me half of thy treasure, and I will go away.”  ‘He took me by the hand, and led me out into the garden.
When the captain of the guard saw me, he wondered.
When the eunuchs saw me, their knees shook and they fell upon the ground in fear.
‘There is a chamber in the palace that has eight walls of red porphyry, and a brass-sealed ceiling hung with lamps.
The Emperor touched one of the walls and it opened, and we passed down a corridor that was lit with many torches.
In niches upon each side stood great wine-jars filled to the brim with silver pieces.
When we reached the centre of the corridor the Emperor spake the word that may not be spoken, and a granite door swung back on a secret spring, and he put his hands before his face lest his eyes should be dazzled.
‘Thou couldst not believe how marvellous a place it was.
There were huge tortoise-shells full of pearls, and hollowed moonstones of great size piled up with red rubies.
The gold was stored in coffers of elephant-hide, and the gold-dust in leather bottles.
There were opals and sapphires, the former in cups of crystal, and the latter in cups of jade.
Round green emeralds were ranged in order upon thin plates of ivory, and in one corner were silk bags filled, some with turquoise-stones, and others with beryls.
The ivory horns were heaped with purple amethysts, and the horns of brass with chalcedonies and sards.
The pillars, which were of cedar, were hung with strings of yellow lynx-stones.
In the flat oval shields there were carbuncles, both wine-coloured and coloured like grass.
And yet I have told thee but a tithe of what was there.
‘And when the Emperor had taken away his hands from before his face he said to me: “This is my house of treasure, and half that is in it is thine, even as I promised to thee.
And I will give thee camels and camel drivers, and they shall do thy bidding and take thy share of the treasure to whatever part of the world thou desirest to go.
And the thing shall be done to-night, for I would not that the Sun, who is my father, should see that there is in my city a man whom I cannot slay.”  ‘But I answered him, “The gold that is here is thine, and the silver also is thine, and thine are the precious jewels and the things of price.
As for me, I have no need of these.
Nor shall I take aught from thee but that little ring that thou wearest on the finger of thy hand.”  ‘And the Emperor frowned.
“It is but a ring of lead,” he cried, “nor has it any value.
Therefore take thy half of the treasure and go from my city.”  ‘“Nay,” I answered, “but I will take nought but that leaden ring, for I know what is written within it, and for what purpose.”  ‘And the Emperor trembled, and besought me and said, “Take all the treasure and go from my city.
The half that is mine shall be thine also.”  ‘And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a cave that is but a day’s journey from this place have, I hidden the Ring of Riches.
It is but a day’s journey from this place, and it waits for thy coming.
He who has this Ring is richer than all the kings of the world.
Come therefore and take it, and the world’s riches shall be thine.’  But the young Fisherman laughed.
‘Love is better than Riches,’ he cried, ‘and the little Mermaid loves me.’  ‘Nay, but there is nothing better than Riches,’ said the Soul.
‘Love is better,’ answered the young Fisherman, and he plunged into the deep, and the Soul went weeping away over the marshes.
And after the third year was over, the Soul came down to the shore of the sea, and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep and said, ‘Why dost thou call to me?’  And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have seen marvellous things.’  So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘In a city that I know of there is an inn that standeth by a river.
I sat there with sailors who drank of two different-coloured wines, and ate bread made of barley, and little salt fish served in bay leaves with vinegar.
And as we sat and made merry, there entered to us an old man bearing a leathern carpet and a lute that had two horns of amber.
And when he had laid out the carpet on the floor, he struck with a quill on the wire strings of his lute, and a girl whose face was veiled ran in and began to dance before us.
Her face was veiled with a veil of gauze, but her feet were naked.
Naked were her feet, and they moved over the carpet like little white pigeons.
Never have I seen anything so marvellous; and the city in which she dances is but a day’s journey from this place.’  Now when the young Fisherman heard the words of his Soul, he remembered that the little Mermaid had no feet and could not dance.
And a great desire came over him, and he said to himself, ‘It is but a day’s journey, and I can return to my love,’ and he laughed, and stood up in the shallow water, and strode towards the shore.
And when he had reached the dry shore he laughed again, and held out his arms to his Soul.
And his Soul gave a great cry of joy and ran to meet him, and entered into him, and the young Fisherman saw stretched before him upon the sand that shadow of the body that is the body of the Soul.
And his Soul said to him, ‘Let us not tarry, but get hence at once, for the Sea-gods are jealous, and have monsters that do their bidding.’                                        So they made haste, and all that night they journeyed beneath the moon, and all the next day they journeyed beneath the sun, and on the evening of the day they came to a city.
And the young Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she dances of whom thou didst speak to me?’  And his Soul answered him, ‘It is not this city, but another.
Nevertheless let us enter in.’  So they entered in and passed through the streets, and as they passed through the Street of the Jewellers the young Fisherman saw a fair silver cup set forth in a booth.
And his Soul said to him, ‘Take that silver cup and hide it.’  So he took the cup and hid it in the fold of his tunic, and they went hurriedly out of the city.
And after that they had gone a league from the city, the young Fisherman frowned, and flung the cup away, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou tell me to take this cup and hide it, for it was an evil thing to do?’  But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’  And on the evening of the second day they came to a city, and the young Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she dances of whom thou didst speak to me?’  And his Soul answered him, ‘It is not this city, but another.
Nevertheless let us enter in.’  So they entered in and passed through the streets, and as they passed through the Street of the Sellers of Sandals, the young Fisherman saw a child standing by a jar of water.
And his Soul said to him, ‘Smite that child.’  So he smote the child till it wept, and when he had done this they went hurriedly out of the city.
And after that they had gone a league from the city the young Fisherman grew wroth, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou tell me to smite the child, for it was an evil thing to do?’  But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’  And on the evening of the third day they came to a city, and the young Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she dances of whom thou didst speak to me?’  And his Soul answered him, ‘It may be that it is in this city, therefore let us enter in.’  So they entered in and passed through the streets, but nowhere could the young Fisherman find the river or the inn that stood by its side.
And the people of the city looked curiously at him, and he grew afraid and said to his Soul, ‘Let us go hence, for she who dances with white feet is not here.’  But his Soul answered, ‘Nay, but let us tarry, for the night is dark and there will be robbers on the way.’  So he sat him down in the market-place and rested, and after a time there went by a hooded merchant who had a cloak of cloth of Tartary, and bare a lantern of pierced horn at the end of a jointed reed.
And the merchant said to him, ‘Why dost thou sit in the market-place, seeing that the booths are closed and the bales corded?’  And the young Fisherman answered him, ‘I can find no inn in this city, nor have I any kinsman who might give me shelter.’  ‘Are we not all kinsmen?’ said the merchant.
‘And did not one God make us?
Therefore come with me, for I have a guest-chamber.’  So the young Fisherman rose up and followed the merchant to his house.
And when he had passed through a garden of pomegranates and entered into the house, the merchant brought him rose-water in a copper dish that he might wash his hands, and ripe melons that he might quench his thirst, and set a bowl of rice and a piece of roasted kid before him.
And after that he had finished, the merchant led him to the guest-chamber, and bade him sleep and be at rest.
And the young Fisherman gave him thanks, and kissed the ring that was on his hand, and flung himself down on the carpets of dyed goat’s-hair.
And when he had covered himself with a covering of black lamb’s-wool he fell asleep.
And three hours before dawn, and while it was still night, his Soul waked him and said to him, ‘Rise up and go to the room of the merchant, even to the room in which he sleepeth, and slay him, and take from him his gold, for we have need of it.’  And the young Fisherman rose up and crept towards the room of the merchant, and over the feet of the merchant there was lying a curved sword, and the tray by the side of the merchant held nine purses of gold.
And he reached out his hand and touched the sword, and when he touched it the merchant started and awoke, and leaping up seized himself the sword and cried to the young Fisherman, ‘Dost thou return evil for good, and pay with the shedding of blood for the kindness that I have shown thee?’  And his Soul said to the young Fisherman, ‘Strike him,’ and he struck him so that he swooned and he seized then the nine purses of gold, and fled hastily through the garden of pomegranates, and set his face to the star that is the star of morning.
And when they had gone a league from the city, the young Fisherman beat his breast, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou bid me slay the merchant and take his gold?
Surely thou art evil.’  But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’  ‘Nay,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘I may not be at peace, for all that thou hast made me to do I hate.
Thee also I hate, and I bid thee tell me wherefore thou hast wrought with me in this wise.’  And his Soul answered him, ‘When thou didst send me forth into the world thou gavest me no heart, so I learned to do all these things and love them.’  ‘What sayest thou?’ murmured the young Fisherman.
‘Thou knowest,’ answered his Soul, ‘thou knowest it well.
Hast thou forgotten that thou gavest me no heart?
I trow not.
And so trouble not thyself nor me, but be at peace, for there is no pain that thou shalt not give away, nor any pleasure that thou shalt not receive.’  And when the young Fisherman heard these words he trembled and said to his Soul, ‘Nay, but thou art evil, and hast made me forget my love, and hast tempted me with temptations, and hast set my feet in the ways of sin.’  And his Soul answered him, ‘Thou hast not forgotten that when thou didst send me forth into the world thou gavest me no heart.
Come, let us go to another city, and make merry, for we have nine purses of gold.’  But the young Fisherman took the nine purses of gold, and flung them down, and trampled on them.
‘Nay,’ he cried, ‘but I will have nought to do with thee, nor will I journey with thee anywhere, but even as I sent thee away before, so will I send thee away now, for thou hast wrought me no good.’  And he turned his back to the moon, and with the little knife that had the handle of green viper’s skin he strove to cut from his feet that shadow of the body which is the body of the Soul.
Yet his Soul stirred not from him, nor paid heed to his command, but said to him, ‘The spell that the Witch told thee avails thee no more, for I may not leave thee, nor mayest thou drive me forth.
Once in his life may a man send his Soul away, but he who receiveth back his Soul must keep it with him for ever, and this is his punishment and his reward.’  And the young Fisherman grew pale and clenched his hands and cried, ‘She was a false Witch in that she told me not that.’  ‘Nay,’ answered his Soul, ‘but she was true to Him she worships, and whose servant she will be ever.’  And when the young Fisherman knew that he could no longer get rid of his Soul, and that it was an evil Soul and would abide with him always, he fell upon the ground weeping bitterly.
And when it was day the young Fisherman rose up and said to his Soul, ‘I will bind my hands that I may not do thy bidding, and close my lips that I may not speak thy words, and I will return to the place where she whom I love has her dwelling.
Even to the sea will I return, and to the little bay where she is wont to sing, and I will call to her and tell her the evil I have done and the evil thou hast wrought on me.’  And his Soul tempted him and said, ‘Who is thy love, that thou shouldst return to her?
The world has many fairer than she is.
There are the dancing-girls of Samaris who dance in the manner of all kinds of birds and beasts.
Their feet are painted with henna, and in their hands they have little copper bells.
They laugh while they dance, and their laughter is as clear as the laughter of water.
Come with me and I will show them to thee.
For what is this trouble of thine about the things of sin?
Is that which is pleasant to eat not made for the eater?
Is there poison in that which is sweet to drink?
Trouble not thyself, but come with me to another city.
There is a little city hard by in which there is a garden of tulip-trees.
And there dwell in this comely garden white peacocks and peacocks that have blue breasts.
Their tails when they spread them to the sun are like disks of ivory and like gilt disks.
And she who feeds them dances for their pleasure, and sometimes she dances on her hands and at other times she dances with her feet.
Her eyes are coloured with stibium, and her nostrils are shaped like the wings of a swallow.
From a hook in one of her nostrils hangs a flower that is carved out of a pearl.
She laughs while she dances, and the silver rings that are about her ankles tinkle like bells of silver.
And so trouble not thyself any more, but come with me to this city.’  But the young Fisherman answered not his Soul, but closed his lips with the seal of silence and with a tight cord bound his hands, and journeyed back to the place from which he had come, even to the little bay where his love had been wont to sing.
And ever did his Soul tempt him by the way, but he made it no answer, nor would he do any of the wickedness that it sought to make him to do, so great was the power of the love that was within him.
And when he had reached the shore of the sea, he loosed the cord from his hands, and took the seal of silence from his lips, and called to the little Mermaid.
But she came not to his call, though he called to her all day long and besought her.
And his Soul mocked him and said, ‘Surely thou hast but little joy out of thy love.
Thou art as one who in time of death pours water into a broken vessel.
Thou givest away what thou hast, and nought is given to thee in return.
It were better for thee to come with me, for I know where the Valley of Pleasure lies, and what things are wrought there.’  But the young Fisherman answered not his Soul, but in a cleft of the rock he built himself a house of wattles, and abode there for the space of a year.
And every morning he called to the Mermaid, and every noon he called to her again, and at night-time he spake her name.
Yet never did she rise out of the sea to meet him, nor in any place of the sea could he find her though he sought for her in the caves and in the green water, in the pools of the tide and in the wells that are at the bottom of the deep.
And ever did his Soul tempt him with evil, and whisper of terrible things.
Yet did it not prevail against him, so great was the power of his love.
And after the year was over, the Soul thought within himself, ‘I have tempted my master with evil, and his love is stronger than I am.
I will tempt him now with good, and it may be that he will come with me.’  So he spake to the young Fisherman and said, ‘I have told thee of the joy of the world, and thou hast turned a deaf ear to me.
Suffer me now to tell thee of the world’s pain, and it may be that thou wilt hearken.
For of a truth pain is the Lord of this world, nor is there any one who escapes from its net.
There be some who lack raiment, and others who lack bread.
There be widows who sit in purple, and widows who sit in rags.
To and fro over the fens go the lepers, and they are cruel to each other.
The beggars go up and down on the highways, and their wallets are empty.
Through the streets of the cities walks Famine, and the Plague sits at their gates.
Come, let us go forth and mend these things, and make them not to be.
Wherefore shouldst thou tarry here calling to thy love, seeing she comes not to thy call?
And what is love, that thou shouldst set this high store upon it?’  But the young Fisherman answered it nought, so great was the power of his love.
And every morning he called to the Mermaid, and every noon he called to her again, and at night-time he spake her name.
Yet never did she rise out of the sea to meet him, nor in any place of the sea could he find her, though he sought for her in the rivers of the sea, and in the valleys that are under the waves, in the sea that the night makes purple, and in the sea that the dawn leaves grey.
And after the second year was over, the Soul said to the young Fisherman at night-time, and as he sat in the wattled house alone, ‘Lo! now I have tempted thee with evil, and I have tempted thee with good, and thy love is stronger than I am.
Wherefore will I tempt thee no longer, but I pray thee to suffer me to enter thy heart, that I may be one with thee even as before.’  ‘Surely thou mayest enter,’ said the young Fisherman, ‘for in the days when with no heart thou didst go through the world thou must have much suffered.’  ‘Alas!’ cried his Soul, ‘I can find no place of entrance, so compassed about with love is this heart of thine.’  ‘Yet I would that I could help thee,’ said the young Fisherman.
And as he spake there came a great cry of mourning from the sea, even the cry that men hear when one of the Sea-folk is dead.
And the young Fisherman leapt up, and left his wattled house, and ran down to the shore.
And the black waves came hurrying to the shore, bearing with them a burden that was whiter than silver.
White as the surf it was, and like a flower it tossed on the waves.
And the surf took it from the waves, and the foam took it from the surf, and the shore received it, and lying at his feet the young Fisherman saw the body of the little Mermaid.
Dead at his feet it was lying.
Weeping as one smitten with pain he flung himself down beside it, and he kissed the cold red of the mouth, and toyed with the wet amber of the hair.
He flung himself down beside it on the sand, weeping as one trembling with joy, and in his brown arms he held it to his breast.
Cold were the lips, yet he kissed them.
Salt was the honey of the hair, yet he tasted it with a bitter joy.
He kissed the closed eyelids, and the wild spray that lay upon their cups was less salt than his tears.
And to the dead thing he made confession.
Into the shells of its ears he poured the harsh wine of his tale.
He put the little hands round his neck, and with his fingers he touched the thin reed of the throat.
Bitter, bitter was his joy, and full of strange gladness was his pain.
The black sea came nearer, and the white foam moaned like a leper.
With white claws of foam the sea grabbled at the shore.
From the palace of the Sea-King came the cry of mourning again, and far out upon the sea the great Tritons blew hoarsely upon their horns.
‘Flee away,’ said his Soul, ‘for ever doth the sea come nigher, and if thou tarriest it will slay thee.
Flee away, for I am afraid, seeing that thy heart is closed against me by reason of the greatness of thy love.
Flee away to a place of safety.
Surely thou wilt not send me without a heart into another world?’  But the young Fisherman listened not to his Soul, but called on the little Mermaid and said, ‘Love is better than wisdom, and more precious than riches, and fairer than the feet of the daughters of men.
The fires cannot destroy it, nor can the waters quench it.
I called on thee at dawn, and thou didst not come to my call.
The moon heard thy name, yet hadst thou no heed of me.
For evilly had I left thee, and to my own hurt had I wandered away.
Yet ever did thy love abide with me, and ever was it strong, nor did aught prevail against it, though I have looked upon evil and looked upon good.
And now that thou art dead, surely I will die with thee also.’  And his Soul besought him to depart, but he would not, so great was his love.
And the sea came nearer, and sought to cover him with its waves, and when he knew that the end was at hand he kissed with mad lips the cold lips of the Mermaid, and the heart that was within him brake.
And as through the fulness of his love his heart did break, the Soul found an entrance and entered in, and was one with him even as before.
And the sea covered the young Fisherman with its waves.
And in the morning the Priest went forth to bless the sea, for it had been troubled.
And with him went the monks and the musicians, and the candle-bearers, and the swingers of censers, and a great company.
And when the Priest reached the shore he saw the young Fisherman lying drowned in the surf, and clasped in his arms was the body of the little Mermaid.
And he drew back frowning, and having made the sign of the cross, he cried aloud and said, ‘I will not bless the sea nor anything that is in it.
Accursed be the Sea-folk, and accursed be all they who traffic with them.
And as for him who for love’s sake forsook God, and so lieth here with his leman slain by God’s judgment, take up his body and the body of his leman, and bury them in the corner of the Field of the Fullers, and set no mark above them, nor sign of any kind, that none may know the place of their resting.
For accursed were they in their lives, and accursed shall they be in their deaths also.’  And the people did as he commanded them, and in the corner of the Field of the Fullers, where no sweet herbs grew, they dug a deep pit, and laid the dead things within it.
And when the third year was over, and on a day that was a holy day, the Priest went up to the chapel, that he might show to the people the wounds of the Lord, and speak to them about the wrath of God.
And when he had robed himself with his robes, and entered in and bowed himself before the altar, he saw that the altar was covered with strange flowers that never had been seen before.
Strange were they to look at, and of curious beauty, and their beauty troubled him, and their odour was sweet in his nostrils.
And he felt glad, and understood not why he was glad.
And after that he had opened the tabernacle, and incensed the monstrance that was in it, and shown the fair wafer to the people, and hid it again behind the veil of veils, he began to speak to the people, desiring to speak to them of the wrath of God.
But the beauty of the white flowers troubled him, and their odour was sweet in his nostrils, and there came another word into his lips, and he spake not of the wrath of God, but of the God whose name is Love.
And why he so spake, he knew not.
And when he had finished his word the people wept, and the Priest went back to the sacristy, and his eyes were full of tears.
And the deacons came in and began to unrobe him, and took from him the alb and the girdle, the maniple and the stole.
And he stood as one in a dream.
And after that they had unrobed him, he looked at them and said, ‘What are the flowers that stand on the altar, and whence do they come?’  And they answered him, ‘What flowers they are we cannot tell, but they come from the corner of the Fullers’ Field.’  And the Priest trembled, and returned to his own house and prayed.
And in the morning, while it was still dawn, he went forth with the monks and the musicians, and the candle-bearers and the swingers of censers, and a great company, and came to the shore of the sea, and blessed the sea, and all the wild things that are in it.
The Fauns also he blessed, and the little things that dance in the woodland, and the bright-eyed things that peer through the leaves.
All the things in God’s world he blessed, and the people were filled with joy and wonder.
Yet never again in the corner of the Fullers’ Field grew flowers of any kind, but the field remained barren even as before.
Nor came the Sea-folk into the bay as they had been wont to do, for they went to another part of the sea.
Once upon a time two poor Woodcutters were making their way home through a great pine-forest.
It was winter, and a night of bitter cold.
The snow lay thick upon the ground, and upon the branches of the trees: the frost kept snapping the little twigs on either side of them, as they passed: and when they came to the Mountain-Torrent she was hanging motionless in air, for the Ice-King had kissed her.
So cold was it that even the animals and the birds did not know what to make of it.
‘Ugh!’ snarled the Wolf, as he limped through the brushwood with his tail between his legs, ‘this is perfectly monstrous weather.
Why doesn’t the Government look to it?’  ‘Weet! weet! weet!’ twittered the green Linnets, ‘the old Earth is dead and they have laid her out in her white shroud.’  ‘The Earth is going to be married, and this is her bridal dress,’ whispered the Turtle-doves to each other.
Their little pink feet were quite frost-bitten, but they felt that it was their duty to take a romantic view of the situation.
‘Nonsense!’ growled the Wolf.
‘I tell you that it is all the fault of the Government, and if you don’t believe me I shall eat you.’  The Wolf had a thoroughly practical mind, and was never at a loss for a good argument.
‘Well, for my own part,’ said the Woodpecker, who was a born philosopher, ‘I don’t care an atomic theory for explanations.
If a thing is so, it is so, and at present it is terribly cold.’  Terribly cold it certainly was.
The little Squirrels, who lived inside the tall fir-tree, kept rubbing each other’s noses to keep themselves warm, and the Rabbits curled themselves up in their holes, and did not venture even to look out of doors.
The only people who seemed to enjoy it were the great horned Owls.
Their feathers were quite stiff with rime, but they did not mind, and they rolled their large yellow eyes, and called out to each other across the forest, ‘Tu-whit!  Tu-whoo!  Tu-whit! Tu-whoo! what delightful weather we are having!’  On and on went the two Woodcutters, blowing lustily upon their fingers, and stamping with their huge iron-shod boots upon the caked snow.
Once they sank into a deep drift, and came out as white as millers are, when the stones are grinding; and once they slipped on the hard smooth ice where the marsh-water was frozen, and their faggots fell out of their bundles, and they had to pick them up and bind them together again; and once they thought that they had lost their way, and a great terror seized on them, for they knew that the Snow is cruel to those who sleep in her arms.
But they put their trust in the good Saint Martin, who watches over all travellers, and retraced their steps, and went warily, and at last they reached the outskirts of the forest, and saw, far down in the valley beneath them, the lights of the village in which they dwelt.
So overjoyed were they at their deliverance that they laughed aloud, and the Earth seemed to them like a flower of silver, and the Moon like a flower of gold.
Yet, after that they had laughed they became sad, for they remembered their poverty, and one of them said to the other, ‘Why did we make merry, seeing that life is for the rich, and not for such as we are?
Better that we had died of cold in the forest, or that some wild beast had fallen upon us and slain us.’  ‘Truly,’ answered his companion, ‘much is given to some, and little is given to others.
Injustice has parcelled out the world, nor is there equal division of aught save of sorrow.’  But as they were bewailing their misery to each other this strange thing happened.
There fell from heaven a very bright and beautiful star.
It slipped down the side of the sky, passing by the other stars in its course, and, as they watched it wondering, it seemed to them to sink behind a clump of willow-trees that stood hard by a little sheepfold no more than a stone’s-throw away.
‘Why! there is a crook of gold for whoever finds it,’ they cried, and they set to and ran, so eager were they for the gold.
And one of them ran faster than his mate, and outstripped him, and forced his way through the willows, and came out on the other side, and lo! there was indeed a thing of gold lying on the white snow.
So he hastened towards it, and stooping down placed his hands upon it, and it was a cloak of golden tissue, curiously wrought with stars, and wrapped in many folds.
And he cried out to his comrade that he had found the treasure that had fallen from the sky, and when his comrade had come up, they sat them down in the snow, and loosened the folds of the cloak that they might divide the pieces of gold.
But, alas! no gold was in it, nor silver, nor, indeed, treasure of any kind, but only a little child who was asleep.
And one of them said to the other: ‘This is a bitter ending to our hope, nor have we any good fortune, for what doth a child profit to a man?
Let us leave it here, and go our way, seeing that we are poor men, and have children of our own whose bread we may not give to another.’  But his companion answered him: ‘Nay, but it were an evil thing to leave the child to perish here in the snow, and though I am as poor as thou art, and have many mouths to feed, and but little in the pot, yet will I bring it home with me, and my wife shall have care of it.’  So very tenderly he took up the child, and wrapped the cloak around it to shield it from the harsh cold, and made his way down the hill to the village, his comrade marvelling much at his foolishness and softness of heart.
And when they came to the village, his comrade said to him, ‘Thou hast the child, therefore give me the cloak, for it is meet that we should share.’  But he answered him: ‘Nay, for the cloak is neither mine nor thine, but the child’s only,’ and he bade him Godspeed, and went to his own house and knocked.
And when his wife opened the door and saw that her husband had returned safe to her, she put her arms round his neck and kissed him, and took from his back the bundle of faggots, and brushed the snow off his boots, and bade him come in.
But he said to her, ‘I have found something in the forest, and I have brought it to thee to have care of it,’ and he stirred not from the threshold.
‘What is it?’ she cried.
‘Show it to me, for the house is bare, and we have need of many things.’  And he drew the cloak back, and showed her the sleeping child.
‘Alack, goodman!’ she murmured, ‘have we not children of our own, that thou must needs bring a changeling to sit by the hearth?
And who knows if it will not bring us bad fortune?
And how shall we tend it?’  And she was wroth against him.
‘Nay, but it is a Star-Child,’ he answered; and he told her the strange manner of the finding of it.
But she would not be appeased, but mocked at him, and spoke angrily, and cried: ‘Our children lack bread, and shall we feed the child of another?
Who is there who careth for us?
And who giveth us food?’  ‘Nay, but God careth for the sparrows even, and feedeth them,’ he answered.
‘Do not the sparrows die of hunger in the winter?’ she asked.
‘And is it not winter now?’  And the man answered nothing, but stirred not from the threshold.
And a bitter wind from the forest came in through the open door, and made her tremble, and she shivered, and said to him: ‘Wilt thou not close the door?
There cometh a bitter wind into the house, and I am cold.’  ‘Into a house where a heart is hard cometh there not always a bitter wind?’ he asked.
And the woman answered him nothing, but crept closer to the fire.
And after a time she turned round and looked at him, and her eyes were full of tears.
And he came in swiftly, and placed the child in her arms, and she kissed it, and laid it in a little bed where the youngest of their own children was lying.
And on the morrow the Woodcutter took the curious cloak of gold and placed it in a great chest, and a chain of amber that was round the child’s neck his wife took and set it in the chest also.
So the Star-Child was brought up with the children of the Woodcutter, and sat at the same board with them, and was their playmate.
And every year he became more beautiful to look at, so that all those who dwelt in the village were filled with wonder, for, while they were swarthy and black-haired, he was white and delicate as sawn ivory, and his curls were like the rings of the daffodil.
His lips, also, were like the petals of a red flower, and his eyes were like violets by a river of pure water, and his body like the narcissus of a field where the mower comes not.
Yet did his beauty work him evil.
For he grew proud, and cruel, and selfish.
The children of the Woodcutter, and the other children of the village, he despised, saying that they were of mean parentage, while he was noble, being sprang from a Star, and he made himself master over them, and called them his servants.
No pity had he for the poor, or for those who were blind or maimed or in any way afflicted, but would cast stones at them and drive them forth on to the highway, and bid them beg their bread elsewhere, so that none save the outlaws came twice to that village to ask for alms.
Indeed, he was as one enamoured of beauty, and would mock at the weakly and ill-favoured, and make jest of them; and himself he loved, and in summer, when the winds were still, he would lie by the well in the priest’s orchard and look down at the marvel of his own face, and laugh for the pleasure he had in his fairness.
Often did the Woodcutter and his wife chide him, and say: ‘We did not deal with thee as thou dealest with those who are left desolate, and have none to succour them.
Wherefore art thou so cruel to all who need pity?’  Often did the old priest send for him, and seek to teach him the love of living things, saying to him: ‘The fly is thy brother.
Do it no harm.
The wild birds that roam through the forest have their freedom.
Snare them not for thy pleasure.
God made the blind-worm and the mole, and each has its place.
Who art thou to bring pain into God’s world?
Even the cattle of the field praise Him.’  But the Star-Child heeded not their words, but would frown and flout, and go back to his companions, and lead them.
And his companions followed him, for he was fair, and fleet of foot, and could dance, and pipe, and make music.
And wherever the Star-Child led them they followed, and whatever the Star-Child bade them do, that did they.
And when he pierced with a sharp reed the dim eyes of the mole, they laughed, and when he cast stones at the leper they laughed also.
And in all things he ruled them, and they became hard of heart even as he was.
Now there passed one day through the village a poor beggar-woman.
Her garments were torn and ragged, and her feet were bleeding from the rough road on which she had travelled, and she was in very evil plight.
And being weary she sat her down under a chestnut-tree to rest.
But when the Star-Child saw her, he said to his companions, ‘See!  There sitteth a foul beggar-woman under that fair and green-leaved tree.
Come, let us drive her hence, for she is ugly and ill-favoured.’  So he came near and threw stones at her, and mocked her, and she looked at him with terror in her eyes, nor did she move her gaze from him.
And when the Woodcutter, who was cleaving logs in a haggard hard by, saw what the Star-Child was doing, he ran up and rebuked him, and said to him: ‘Surely thou art hard of heart and knowest not mercy, for what evil has this poor woman done to thee that thou shouldst treat her in this wise?’  And the Star-Child grew red with anger, and stamped his foot upon the ground, and said, ‘Who art thou to question me what I do?
I am no son of thine to do thy bidding.’  ‘Thou speakest truly,’ answered the Woodcutter, ‘yet did I show thee pity when I found thee in the forest.’  And when the woman heard these words she gave a loud cry, and fell into a swoon.
And the Woodcutter carried her to his own house, and his wife had care of her, and when she rose up from the swoon into which she had fallen, they set meat and drink before her, and bade her have comfort.
But she would neither eat nor drink, but said to the Woodcutter, ‘Didst thou not say that the child was found in the forest?
And was it not ten years from this day?’  And the Woodcutter answered, ‘Yea, it was in the forest that I found him, and it is ten years from this day.’  ‘And what signs didst thou find with him?’ she cried.
‘Bare he not upon his neck a chain of amber?
Was not round him a cloak of gold tissue broidered with stars?’  ‘Truly,’ answered the Woodcutter, ‘it was even as thou sayest.’  And he took the cloak and the amber chain from the chest where they lay, and showed them to her.
And when she saw them she wept for joy, and said, ‘He is my little son whom I lost in the forest.
I pray thee send for him quickly, for in search of him have I wandered over the whole world.’  So the Woodcutter and his wife went out and called to the Star-Child, and said to him, ‘Go into the house, and there shalt thou find thy mother, who is waiting for thee.’  So he ran in, filled with wonder and great gladness.
But when he saw her who was waiting there, he laughed scornfully and said, ‘Why, where is my mother?
For I see none here but this vile beggar-woman.’  And the woman answered him, ‘I am thy mother.’  ‘Thou art mad to say so,’ cried the Star-Child angrily.
‘I am no son of thine, for thou art a beggar, and ugly, and in rags.
Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thy foul face no more.’  ‘Nay, but thou art indeed my little son, whom I bare in the forest,’ she cried, and she fell on her knees, and held out her arms to him.
‘The robbers stole thee from me, and left thee to die,’ she murmured, ‘but I recognised thee when I saw thee, and the signs also have I recognised, the cloak of golden tissue and the amber chain.
Therefore I pray thee come with me, for over the whole world have I wandered in search of thee.
Come with me, my son, for I have need of thy love.’  But the Star-Child stirred not from his place, but shut the doors of his heart against her, nor was there any sound heard save the sound of the woman weeping for pain.
And at last he spoke to her, and his voice was hard and bitter.
‘If in very truth thou art my mother,’ he said, ‘it had been better hadst thou stayed away, and not come here to bring me to shame, seeing that I thought I was the child of some Star, and not a beggar’s child, as thou tellest me that I am.
Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thee no more.’  ‘Alas! my son,’ she cried, ‘wilt thou not kiss me before I go?
For I have suffered much to find thee.’  ‘Nay,’ said the Star-Child, ‘but thou art too foul to look at, and rather would I kiss the adder or the toad than thee.’  So the woman rose up, and went away into the forest weeping bitterly, and when the Star-Child saw that she had gone, he was glad, and ran back to his playmates that he might play with them.
But when they beheld him coming, they mocked him and said, ‘Why, thou art as foul as the toad, and as loathsome as the adder.
Get thee hence, for we will not suffer thee to play with us,’ and they drave him out of the garden.
And the Star-Child frowned and said to himself, ‘What is this that they say to me?
I will go to the well of water and look into it, and it shall tell me of my beauty.’  So he went to the well of water and looked into it, and lo! his face was as the face of a toad, and his body was sealed like an adder.
And he flung himself down on the grass and wept, and said to himself, ‘Surely this has come upon me by reason of my sin.
For I have denied my mother, and driven her away, and been proud, and cruel to her.
Wherefore I will go and seek her through the whole world, nor will I rest till I have found her.’  And there came to him the little daughter of the Woodcutter, and she put her hand upon his shoulder and said, ‘What doth it matter if thou hast lost thy comeliness?
Stay with us, and I will not mock at thee.’  And he said to her, ‘Nay, but I have been cruel to my mother, and as a punishment has this evil been sent to me.
Wherefore I must go hence, and wander through the world till I find her, and she give me her forgiveness.’  So he ran away into the forest and called out to his mother to come to him, but there was no answer.
All day long he called to her, and, when the sun set he lay down to sleep on a bed of leaves, and the birds and the animals fled from him, for they remembered his cruelty, and he was alone save for the toad that watched him, and the slow adder that crawled past.
And in the morning he rose up, and plucked some bitter berries from the trees and ate them, and took his way through the great wood, weeping sorely.
And of everything that he met he made inquiry if perchance they had seen his mother.
He said to the Mole, ‘Thou canst go beneath the earth.
Tell me, is my mother there?’  And the Mole answered, ‘Thou hast blinded mine eyes.
How should I know?’  He said to the Linnet, ‘Thou canst fly over the tops of the tall trees, and canst see the whole world.
Tell me, canst thou see my mother?’  And the Linnet answered, ‘Thou hast clipt my wings for thy pleasure.
How should I fly?’  And to the little Squirrel who lived in the fir-tree, and was lonely, he said, ‘Where is my mother?’  And the Squirrel answered, ‘Thou hast slain mine.
Dost thou seek to slay thine also?’  And the Star-Child wept and bowed his head, and prayed forgiveness of God’s things, and went on through the forest, seeking for the beggar-woman.
And on the third day he came to the other side of the forest and went down into the plain.
And when he passed through the villages the children mocked him, and threw stones at him, and the carlots would not suffer him even to sleep in the byres lest he might bring mildew on the stored corn, so foul was he to look at, and their hired men drave him away, and there was none who had pity on him.
Nor could he hear anywhere of the beggar-woman who was his mother, though for the space of three years he wandered over the world, and often seemed to see her on the road in front of him, and would call to her, and run after her till the sharp flints made his feet to bleed.
But overtake her he could not, and those who dwelt by the way did ever deny that they had seen her, or any like to her, and they made sport of his sorrow.
For the space of three years he wandered over the world, and in the world there was neither love nor loving-kindness nor charity for him, but it was even such a world as he had made for himself in the days of his great pride.
And one evening he came to the gate of a strong-walled city that stood by a river, and, weary and footsore though he was, he made to enter in.
But the soldiers who stood on guard dropped their halberts across the entrance, and said roughly to him, ‘What is thy business in the city?’  ‘I am seeking for my mother,’ he answered, ‘and I pray ye to suffer me to pass, for it may be that she is in this city.’  But they mocked at him, and one of them wagged a black beard, and set down his shield and cried, ‘Of a truth, thy mother will not be merry when she sees thee, for thou art more ill-favoured than the toad of the marsh, or the adder that crawls in the fen.
Get thee gone.
Get thee gone.
Thy mother dwells not in this city.’  And another, who held a yellow banner in his hand, said to him, ‘Who is thy mother, and wherefore art thou seeking for her?’  And he answered, ‘My mother is a beggar even as I am, and I have treated her evilly, and I pray ye to suffer me to pass that she may give me her forgiveness, if it be that she tarrieth in this city.’  But they would not, and pricked him with their spears.
And, as he turned away weeping, one whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose helmet couched a lion that had wings, came up and made inquiry of the soldiers who it was who had sought entrance.
And they said to him, ‘It is a beggar and the child of a beggar, and we have driven him away.’  ‘Nay,’ he cried, laughing, ‘but we will sell the foul thing for a slave, and his price shall be the price of a bowl of sweet wine.’  And an old and evil-visaged man who was passing by called out, and said, ‘I will buy him for that price,’ and, when he had paid the price, he took the Star-Child by the hand and led him into the city.
And after that they had gone through many streets they came to a little door that was set in a wall that was covered with a pomegranate tree.
And the old man touched the door with a ring of graved jasper and it opened, and they went down five steps of brass into a garden filled with black poppies and green jars of burnt clay.
And the old man took then from his turban a scarf of figured silk, and bound with it the eyes of the Star-Child, and drave him in front of him.
And when the scarf was taken off his eyes, the Star-Child found himself in a dungeon, that was lit by a lantern of horn.
And the old man set before him some mouldy bread on a trencher and said, ‘Eat,’ and some brackish water in a cup and said, ‘Drink,’ and when he had eaten and drunk, the old man went out, locking the door behind him and fastening it with an iron chain.
And on the morrow the old man, who was indeed the subtlest of the magicians of Libya and had learned his art from one who dwelt in the tombs of the Nile, came in to him and frowned at him, and said, ‘In a wood that is nigh to the gate of this city of Giaours there are three pieces of gold.
One is of white gold, and another is of yellow gold, and the gold of the third one is red.
To-day thou shalt bring me the piece of white gold, and if thou bringest it not back, I will beat thee with a hundred stripes.
Get thee away quickly, and at sunset I will be waiting for thee at the door of the garden.
See that thou bringest the white gold, or it shall go ill with thee, for thou art my slave, and I have bought thee for the price of a bowl of sweet wine.’  And he bound the eyes of the Star-Child with the scarf of figured silk, and led him through the house, and through the garden of poppies, and up the five steps of brass.
And having opened the little door with his ring he set him in the street.
And the Star-Child went out of the gate of the city, and came to the wood of which the Magician had spoken to him.
Now this wood was very fair to look at from without, and seemed full of singing birds and of sweet-scented flowers, and the Star-Child entered it gladly.
Yet did its beauty profit him little, for wherever he went harsh briars and thorns shot up from the ground and encompassed him, and evil nettles stung him, and the thistle pierced him with her daggers, so that he was in sore distress.
Nor could he anywhere find the piece of white gold of which the Magician had spoken, though he sought for it from morn to noon, and from noon to sunset.
And at sunset he set his face towards home, weeping bitterly, for he knew what fate was in store for him.
But when he had reached the outskirts of the wood, he heard from a thicket a cry as of some one in pain.
And forgetting his own sorrow he ran back to the place, and saw there a little Hare caught in a trap that some hunter had set for it.
And the Star-Child had pity on it, and released it, and said to it, ‘I am myself but a slave, yet may I give thee thy freedom.’  And the Hare answered him, and said: ‘Surely thou hast given me freedom, and what shall I give thee in return?’  And the Star-Child said to it, ‘I am seeking for a piece of white gold, nor can I anywhere find it, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me.’  ‘Come thou with me,’ said the Hare, ‘and I will lead thee to it, for I know where it is hidden, and for what purpose.’  So the Star-Child went with the Hare, and lo! in the cleft of a great oak-tree he saw the piece of white gold that he was seeking.
And he was filled with joy, and seized it, and said to the Hare, ‘The service that I did to thee thou hast rendered back again many times over, and the kindness that I showed thee thou hast repaid a hundred-fold.’  ‘Nay,’ answered the Hare, ‘but as thou dealt with me, so I did deal with thee,’ and it ran away swiftly, and the Star-Child went towards the city.
Now at the gate of the city there was seated one who was a leper.
Over his face hung a cowl of grey linen, and through the eyelets his eyes gleamed like red coals.
And when he saw the Star-Child coming, he struck upon a wooden bowl, and clattered his bell, and called out to him, and said, ‘Give me a piece of money, or I must die of hunger.
For they have thrust me out of the city, and there is no one who has pity on me.’  ‘Alas!’ cried the Star-Child, ‘I have but one piece of money in my wallet, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me, for I am his slave.’  But the leper entreated him, and prayed of him, till the Star-Child had pity, and gave him the piece of white gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and brought him in, and said to him, ‘Hast thou the piece of white gold?’ And the Star-Child answered, ‘I have it not.’  So the Magician fell upon him, and beat him, and set before him an empty trencher, and said, ‘Eat,’ and an empty cup, and said, ‘Drink,’ and flung him again into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, ‘If to-day thou bringest me not the piece of yellow gold, I will surely keep thee as my slave, and give thee three hundred stripes.’  So the Star-Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the piece of yellow gold, but nowhere could he find it.
And at sunset he sat him down and began to weep, and as he was weeping there came to him the little Hare that he had rescued from the trap.
And the Hare said to him, ‘Why art thou weeping?
And what dost thou seek in the wood?’  And the Star-Child answered, ‘I am seeking for a piece of yellow gold that is hidden here, and if I find it not my master will beat me, and keep me as a slave.’  ‘Follow me,’ cried the Hare, and it ran through the wood till it came to a pool of water.
And at the bottom of the pool the piece of yellow gold was lying.
‘How shall I thank thee?’ said the Star-Child, ‘for lo! this is the second time that you have succoured me.’  ‘Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,’ said the Hare, and it ran away swiftly.
And the Star-Child took the piece of yellow gold, and put it in his wallet, and hurried to the city.
But the leper saw him coming, and ran to meet him, and knelt down and cried, ‘Give me a piece of money or I shall die of hunger.’  And the Star-Child said to him, ‘I have in my wallet but one piece of yellow gold, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me and keep me as his slave.’  But the leper entreated him sore, so that the Star-Child had pity on him, and gave him the piece of yellow gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and brought him in, and said to him, ‘Hast thou the piece of yellow gold?’ And the Star-Child said to him, ‘I have it not.’  So the Magician fell upon him, and beat him, and loaded him with chains, and cast him again into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, ‘If to-day thou bringest me the piece of red gold I will set thee free, but if thou bringest it not I will surely slay thee.’  So the Star-Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the piece of red gold, but nowhere could he find it.
And at evening he sat him down and wept, and as he was weeping there came to him the little Hare.
And the Hare said to him, ‘The piece of red gold that thou seekest is in the cavern that is behind thee.
Therefore weep no more but be glad.’  ‘How shall I reward thee?’ cried the Star-Child, ‘for lo! this is the third time thou hast succoured me.’  ‘Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,’ said the Hare, and it ran away swiftly.
And the Star-Child entered the cavern, and in its farthest corner he found the piece of red gold.
So he put it in his wallet, and hurried to the city.
And the leper seeing him coming, stood in the centre of the road, and cried out, and said to him, ‘Give me the piece of red money, or I must die,’ and the Star-Child had pity on him again, and gave him the piece of red gold, saying, ‘Thy need is greater than mine.’  Yet was his heart heavy, for he knew what evil fate awaited him.
But lo! as he passed through the gate of the city, the guards bowed down and made obeisance to him, saying, ‘How beautiful is our lord!’ and a crowd of citizens followed him, and cried out, ‘Surely there is none so beautiful in the whole world!’ so that the Star-Child wept, and said to himself, ‘They are mocking me, and making light of my misery.’  And so large was the concourse of the people, that he lost the threads of his way, and found himself at last in a great square, in which there was a palace of a King.
And the gate of the palace opened, and the priests and the high officers of the city ran forth to meet him, and they abased themselves before him, and said, ‘Thou art our lord for whom we have been waiting, and the son of our King.’  And the Star-Child answered them and said, ‘I am no king’s son, but the child of a poor beggar-woman.
And how say ye that I am beautiful, for I know that I am evil to look at?’  Then he, whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose helmet crouched a lion that had wings, held up a shield, and cried, ‘How saith my lord that he is not beautiful?’  And the Star-Child looked, and lo! his face was even as it had been, and his comeliness had come back to him, and he saw that in his eyes which he had not seen there before.
And the priests and the high officers knelt down and said to him, ‘It was prophesied of old that on this day should come he who was to rule over us.
Therefore, let our lord take this crown and this sceptre, and be in his justice and mercy our King over us.’  But he said to them, ‘I am not worthy, for I have denied the mother who bare me, nor may I rest till I have found her, and known her forgiveness.
Therefore, let me go, for I must wander again over the world, and may not tarry here, though ye bring me the crown and the sceptre.’  And as he spake he turned his face from them towards the street that led to the gate of the city, and lo! amongst the crowd that pressed round the soldiers, he saw the beggar-woman who was his mother, and at her side stood the leper, who had sat by the road.
And a cry of joy broke from his lips, and he ran over, and kneeling down he kissed the wounds on his mother’s feet, and wet them with his tears.
He bowed his head in the dust, and sobbing, as one whose heart might break, he said to her: ‘Mother, I denied thee in the hour of my pride.
Accept me in the hour of my humility.
Mother, I gave thee hatred.
Do thou give me love.
Mother, I rejected thee.
Receive thy child now.’ But the beggar-woman answered him not a word.
And he reached out his hands, and clasped the white feet of the leper, and said to him: ‘Thrice did I give thee of my mercy.
Bid my mother speak to me once.’  But the leper answered him not a word.
And he sobbed again and said: ‘Mother, my suffering is greater than I can bear.
Give me thy forgiveness, and let me go back to the forest.’  And the beggar-woman put her hand on his head, and said to him, ‘Rise,’ and the leper put his hand on his head, and said to him, ‘Rise,’ also.
And he rose up from his feet, and looked at them, and lo! they were a King and a Queen.
And the Queen said to him, ‘This is thy father whom thou hast succoured.’ And the King said, ‘This is thy mother whose feet thou hast washed with thy tears.’  And they fell on his neck and kissed him, and brought him into the palace and clothed him in fair raiment, and set the crown upon his head, and the sceptre in his hand, and over the city that stood by the river he ruled, and was its lord.
Much justice and mercy did he show to all, and the evil Magician he banished, and to the Woodcutter and his wife he sent many rich gifts, and to their children he gave high honour.
Nor would he suffer any to be cruel to bird or beast, but taught love and loving-kindness and charity, and to the poor he gave bread, and to the naked he gave raiment, and there was peace and plenty in the land.
Yet ruled he not long, so great had been his suffering, and so bitter the fire of his testing, for after the space of three years he died.
And he who came after him ruled evilly.﻿It was the night before the day fixed for his coronation, and the young  King was sitting alone in his beautiful chamber.
His courtiers had all  taken their leave of him, bowing their heads to the ground, according to  the ceremonious usage of the day, and had retired to the Great Hall of  the Palace, to receive a few last lessons from the Professor of  Etiquette; there being some of them who had still quite natural manners,  which in a courtier is, I need hardly say, a very grave offence.
The lad—for he was only a lad, being but sixteen years of age—was not  sorry at their departure, and had flung himself back with a deep sigh of  relief on the soft cushions of his embroidered couch, lying there,  wild-eyed and open-mouthed, like a brown woodland Faun, or some young  animal of the forest newly snared by the hunters.
And, indeed, it was the hunters who had found him, coming upon him almost  by chance as, bare-limbed and pipe in hand, he was following the flock of  the poor goatherd who had brought him up, and whose son he had always  fancied himself to be.
The child of the old King’s only daughter by a  secret marriage with one much beneath her in station—a stranger, some  said, who, by the wonderful magic of his lute-playing, had made the young  Princess love him; while others spoke of an artist from Rimini, to whom  the Princess had shown much, perhaps too much honour, and who had  suddenly disappeared from the city, leaving his work in the Cathedral  unfinished—he had been, when but a week old, stolen away from his  mother’s side, as she slept, and given into the charge of a common  peasant and his wife, who were without children of their own, and lived  in a remote part of the forest, more than a day’s ride from the town.
Grief, or the plague, as the court physician stated, or, as some  suggested, a swift Italian poison administered in a cup of spiced wine,  slew, within an hour of her wakening, the white girl who had given him  birth, and as the trusty messenger who bare the child across his  saddle-bow stooped from his weary horse and knocked at the rude door of  the goatherd’s hut, the body of the Princess was being lowered into an  open grave that had been dug in a deserted churchyard, beyond the city  gates, a grave where it was said that another body was also lying, that  of a young man of marvellous and foreign beauty, whose hands were tied  behind him with a knotted cord, and whose breast was stabbed with many  red wounds.
Such, at least, was the story that men whispered to each other.
Certain  it was that the old King, when on his deathbed, whether moved by remorse  for his great sin, or merely desiring that the kingdom should not pass  away from his line, had had the lad sent for, and, in the presence of the  Council, had acknowledged him as his heir.
And it seems that from the very first moment of his recognition he had  shown signs of that strange passion for beauty that was destined to have  so great an influence over his life.
Those who accompanied him to the  suite of rooms set apart for his service, often spoke of the cry of  pleasure that broke from his lips when he saw the delicate raiment and  rich jewels that had been prepared for him, and of the almost fierce joy  with which he flung aside his rough leathern tunic and coarse sheepskin  cloak.
He missed, indeed, at times the fine freedom of his forest life,  and was always apt to chafe at the tedious Court ceremonies that occupied  so much of each day, but the wonderful palace—_Joyeuse_, as they called  it—of which he now found himself lord, seemed to him to be a new world  fresh-fashioned for his delight; and as soon as he could escape from the  council-board or audience-chamber, he would run down the great staircase,  with its lions of gilt bronze and its steps of bright porphyry, and  wander from room to room, and from corridor to corridor, like one who was  seeking to find in beauty an anodyne from pain, a sort of restoration  from sickness.
Upon these journeys of discovery, as he would call them—and, indeed, they  were to him real voyages through a marvellous land, he would sometimes be  accompanied by the slim, fair-haired Court pages, with their floating  mantles, and gay fluttering ribands; but more often he would be alone,  feeling through a certain quick instinct, which was almost a divination,  that the secrets of art are best learned in secret, and that Beauty, like  Wisdom, loves the lonely worshipper.
Many curious stories were related about him at this period.
It was said  that a stout Burgo-master, who had come to deliver a florid oratorical  address on behalf of the citizens of the town, had caught sight of him  kneeling in real adoration before a great picture that had just been  brought from Venice, and that seemed to herald the worship of some new  gods.
On another occasion he had been missed for several hours, and  after a lengthened search had been discovered in a little chamber in one  of the northern turrets of the palace gazing, as one in a trance, at a  Greek gem carved with the figure of Adonis.
He had been seen, so the  tale ran, pressing his warm lips to the marble brow of an antique statue  that had been discovered in the bed of the river on the occasion of the  building of the stone bridge, and was inscribed with the name of the  Bithynian slave of Hadrian.
He had passed a whole night in noting the  effect of the moonlight on a silver image of Endymion.
All rare and costly materials had certainly a great fascination for him,  and in his eagerness to procure them he had sent away many merchants,  some to traffic for amber with the rough fisher-folk of the north seas,  some to Egypt to look for that curious green turquoise which is found  only in the tombs of kings, and is said to possess magical properties,  some to Persia for silken carpets and painted pottery, and others to  India to buy gauze and stained ivory, moonstones and bracelets of jade,  sandal-wood and blue enamel and shawls of fine wool.
But what had occupied him most was the robe he was to wear at his  coronation, the robe of tissued gold, and the ruby-studded crown, and the  sceptre with its rows and rings of pearls.
Indeed, it was of this that  he was thinking to-night, as he lay back on his luxurious couch, watching  the great pinewood log that was burning itself out on the open hearth.
The designs, which were from the hands of the most famous artists of the  time, had been submitted to him many months before, and he had given  orders that the artificers were to toil night and day to carry them out,  and that the whole world was to be searched for jewels that would be  worthy of their work.
He saw himself in fancy standing at the high altar  of the cathedral in the fair raiment of a King, and a smile played and  lingered about his boyish lips, and lit up with a bright lustre his dark  woodland eyes.
After some time he rose from his seat, and leaning against the carved  penthouse of the chimney, looked round at the dimly-lit room.
The walls  were hung with rich tapestries representing the Triumph of Beauty.
A  large press, inlaid with agate and lapis-lazuli, filled one corner, and  facing the window stood a curiously wrought cabinet with lacquer panels  of powdered and mosaiced gold, on which were placed some delicate goblets  of Venetian glass, and a cup of dark-veined onyx.
Pale poppies were  broidered on the silk coverlet of the bed, as though they had fallen from  the tired hands of sleep, and tall reeds of fluted ivory bare up the  velvet canopy, from which great tufts of ostrich plumes sprang, like  white foam, to the pallid silver of the fretted ceiling.
A laughing  Narcissus in green bronze held a polished mirror above its head.
On the  table stood a flat bowl of amethyst.
Outside he could see the huge dome of the cathedral, looming like a  bubble over the shadowy houses, and the weary sentinels pacing up and  down on the misty terrace by the river.
Far away, in an orchard, a  nightingale was singing.
A faint perfume of jasmine came through the  open window.
He brushed his brown curls back from his forehead, and  taking up a lute, let his fingers stray across the cords.
His heavy  eyelids drooped, and a strange languor came over him.
Never before had  he felt so keenly, or with such exquisite joy, the magic and the mystery  of beautiful things.
When midnight sounded from the clock-tower he touched a bell, and his  pages entered and disrobed him with much ceremony, pouring rose-water  over his hands, and strewing flowers on his pillow.
A few moments after  that they had left the room, he fell asleep.
And as he slept he dreamed a dream, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was standing in a long, low attic, amidst the whir and  clatter of many looms.
The meagre daylight peered in through the grated  windows, and showed him the gaunt figures of the weavers bending over  their cases.
Pale, sickly-looking children were crouched on the huge  crossbeams.
As the shuttles dashed through the warp they lifted up the  heavy battens, and when the shuttles stopped they let the battens fall  and pressed the threads together.
Their faces were pinched with famine,  and their thin hands shook and trembled.
Some haggard women were seated  at a table sewing.
A horrible odour filled the place.
The air was foul  and heavy, and the walls dripped and streamed with damp.
The young King went over to one of the weavers, and stood by him and  watched him.
And the weaver looked at him angrily, and said, ‘Why art thou watching  me?
Art thou a spy set on us by our master?’    ‘Who is thy master?’ asked the young King.
‘Our master!’ cried the weaver, bitterly.
‘He is a man like myself.
Indeed, there is but this difference between us—that he wears fine  clothes while I go in rags, and that while I am weak from hunger he  suffers not a little from overfeeding.’    ‘The land is free,’ said the young King, ‘and thou art no man’s slave.’    ‘In war,’ answered the weaver, ‘the strong make slaves of the weak, and  in peace the rich make slaves of the poor.
We must work to live, and  they give us such mean wages that we die.
We toil for them all day long,  and they heap up gold in their coffers, and our children fade away before  their time, and the faces of those we love become hard and evil.
We  tread out the grapes, and another drinks the wine.
We sow the corn, and  our own board is empty.
We have chains, though no eye beholds them; and  are slaves, though men call us free.’    ‘Is it so with all?’ he asked,    ‘It is so with all,’ answered the weaver, ‘with the young as well as with  the old, with the women as well as with the men, with the little children  as well as with those who are stricken in years.
The merchants grind us  down, and we must needs do their bidding.
The priest rides by and tells  his beads, and no man has care of us.
Through our sunless lanes creeps  Poverty with her hungry eyes, and Sin with his sodden face follows close  behind her.
Misery wakes us in the morning, and Shame sits with us at  night.
But what are these things to thee?
Thou art not one of us.
Thy  face is too happy.’  And he turned away scowling, and threw the shuttle  across the loom, and the young King saw that it was threaded with a  thread of gold.
And a great terror seized upon him, and he said to the weaver, ‘What robe  is this that thou art weaving?’    ‘It is the robe for the coronation of the young King,’ he answered; ‘what  is that to thee?’    And the young King gave a loud cry and woke, and lo! he was in his own  chamber, and through the window he saw the great honey-coloured moon  hanging in the dusky air.
And he fell asleep again and dreamed, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was lying on the deck of a huge galley that was being  rowed by a hundred slaves.
On a carpet by his side the master of the  galley was seated.
He was black as ebony, and his turban was of crimson  silk.
Great earrings of silver dragged down the thick lobes of his ears,  and in his hands he had a pair of ivory scales.
The slaves were naked, but for a ragged loin-cloth, and each man was  chained to his neighbour.
The hot sun beat brightly upon them, and the  negroes ran up and down the gangway and lashed them with whips of hide.
They stretched out their lean arms and pulled the heavy oars through the  water.
The salt spray flew from the blades.
At last they reached a little bay, and began to take soundings.
A light  wind blew from the shore, and covered the deck and the great lateen sail  with a fine red dust.
Three Arabs mounted on wild asses rode out and  threw spears at them.
The master of the galley took a painted bow in his  hand and shot one of them in the throat.
He fell heavily into the surf,  and his companions galloped away.
A woman wrapped in a yellow veil  followed slowly on a camel, looking back now and then at the dead body.
As soon as they had cast anchor and hauled down the sail, the negroes  went into the hold and brought up a long rope-ladder, heavily weighted  with lead.
The master of the galley threw it over the side, making the  ends fast to two iron stanchions.
Then the negroes seized the youngest  of the slaves and knocked his gyves off, and filled his nostrils and his  ears with wax, and tied a big stone round his waist.
He crept wearily  down the ladder, and disappeared into the sea.
A few bubbles rose where  he sank.
Some of the other slaves peered curiously over the side.
At  the prow of the galley sat a shark-charmer, beating monotonously upon a  drum.
After some time the diver rose up out of the water, and clung panting to  the ladder with a pearl in his right hand.
The negroes seized it from  him, and thrust him back.
The slaves fell asleep over their oars.
Again and again he came up, and each time that he did so he brought with  him a beautiful pearl.
The master of the galley weighed them, and put  them into a little bag of green leather.
The young King tried to speak, but his tongue seemed to cleave to the  roof of his mouth, and his lips refused to move.
The negroes chattered  to each other, and began to quarrel over a string of bright beads.
Two  cranes flew round and round the vessel.
Then the diver came up for the last time, and the pearl that he brought  with him was fairer than all the pearls of Ormuz, for it was shaped like  the full moon, and whiter than the morning star.
But his face was  strangely pale, and as he fell upon the deck the blood gushed from his  ears and nostrils.
He quivered for a little, and then he was still.
The  negroes shrugged their shoulders, and threw the body overboard.
And the master of the galley laughed, and, reaching out, he took the  pearl, and when he saw it he pressed it to his forehead and bowed.
‘It  shall be,’ he said, ‘for the sceptre of the young King,’ and he made a  sign to the negroes to draw up the anchor.
And when the young King heard this he gave a great cry, and woke, and  through the window he saw the long grey fingers of the dawn clutching at  the fading stars.
And he fell asleep again, and dreamed, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was wandering through a dim wood, hung with strange  fruits and with beautiful poisonous flowers.
The adders hissed at him as  he went by, and the bright parrots flew screaming from branch to branch.
Huge tortoises lay asleep upon the hot mud.
The trees were full of apes  and peacocks.
On and on he went, till he reached the outskirts of the wood, and there  he saw an immense multitude of men toiling in the bed of a dried-up  river.
They swarmed up the crag like ants.
They dug deep pits in the  ground and went down into them.
Some of them cleft the rocks with great  axes; others grabbled in the sand.
They tore up the cactus by its roots, and trampled on the scarlet  blossoms.
They hurried about, calling to each other, and no man was  idle.
From the darkness of a cavern Death and Avarice watched them, and Death  said, ‘I am weary; give me a third of them and let me go.’  But Avarice  shook her head.
‘They are my servants,’ she answered.
And Death said to her, ‘What hast thou in thy hand?’    ‘I have three grains of corn,’ she answered; ‘what is that to thee?’    ‘Give me one of them,’ cried Death, ‘to plant in my garden; only one of  them, and I will go away.’    ‘I will not give thee anything,’ said Avarice, and she hid her hand in  the fold of her raiment.
And Death laughed, and took a cup, and dipped it into a pool of water,  and out of the cup rose Ague.
She passed through the great multitude,  and a third of them lay dead.
A cold mist followed her, and the  water-snakes ran by her side.
And when Avarice saw that a third of the multitude was dead she beat her  breast and wept.
She beat her barren bosom, and cried aloud.
‘Thou hast  slain a third of my servants,’ she cried, ‘get thee gone.
There is war  in the mountains of Tartary, and the kings of each side are calling to  thee.
The Afghans have slain the black ox, and are marching to battle.
They have beaten upon their shields with their spears, and have put on  their helmets of iron.
What is my valley to thee, that thou shouldst  tarry in it?
Get thee gone, and come here no more.’    ‘Nay,’ answered Death, ‘but till thou hast given me a grain of corn I  will not go.’    But Avarice shut her hand, and clenched her teeth.
‘I will not give thee  anything,’ she muttered.
And Death laughed, and took up a black stone, and threw it into the  forest, and out of a thicket of wild hemlock came Fever in a robe of  flame.
She passed through the multitude, and touched them, and each man  that she touched died.
The grass withered beneath her feet as she  walked.
And Avarice shuddered, and put ashes on her head.
‘Thou art cruel,’ she  cried; ‘thou art cruel.
There is famine in the walled cities of India,  and the cisterns of Samarcand have run dry.
There is famine in the  walled cities of Egypt, and the locusts have come up from the desert.
The Nile has not overflowed its banks, and the priests have cursed Isis  and Osiris.
Get thee gone to those who need thee, and leave me my  servants.’    ‘Nay,’ answered Death, ‘but till thou hast given me a grain of corn I  will not go.’    ‘I will not give thee anything,’ said Avarice.
And Death laughed again, and he whistled through his fingers, and a woman  came flying through the air.
Plague was written upon her forehead, and a  crowd of lean vultures wheeled round her.
She covered the valley with  her wings, and no man was left alive.
And Avarice fled shrieking through the forest, and Death leaped upon his  red horse and galloped away, and his galloping was faster than the wind.
And out of the slime at the bottom of the valley crept dragons and  horrible things with scales, and the jackals came trotting along the  sand, sniffing up the air with their nostrils.
And the young King wept, and said: ‘Who were these men, and for what were  they seeking?’    ‘For rubies for a king’s crown,’ answered one who stood behind him.
And the young King started, and, turning round, he saw a man habited as a  pilgrim and holding in his hand a mirror of silver.
And he grew pale, and said: ‘For what king?’    And the pilgrim answered: ‘Look in this mirror, and thou shalt see him.’    And he looked in the mirror, and, seeing his own face, he gave a great  cry and woke, and the bright sunlight was streaming into the room, and  from the trees of the garden and pleasaunce the birds were singing.
And the Chamberlain and the high officers of State came in and made  obeisance to him, and the pages brought him the robe of tissued gold, and  set the crown and the sceptre before him.
And the young King looked at them, and they were beautiful.
More  beautiful were they than aught that he had ever seen.
But he remembered  his dreams, and he said to his lords: ‘Take these things away, for I will  not wear them.’    And the courtiers were amazed, and some of them laughed, for they thought  that he was jesting.
But he spake sternly to them again, and said: ‘Take these things away,  and hide them from me.
Though it be the day of my coronation, I will not  wear them.
For on the loom of Sorrow, and by the white hands of Pain,  has this my robe been woven.
There is Blood in the heart of the ruby,  and Death in the heart of the pearl.’  And he told them his three dreams.
And when the courtiers heard them they looked at each other and  whispered, saying: ‘Surely he is mad; for what is a dream but a dream,  and a vision but a vision?
They are not real things that one should heed  them.
And what have we to do with the lives of those who toil for us?
Shall a man not eat bread till he has seen the sower, nor drink wine till  he has talked with the vinedresser?’    And the Chamberlain spake to the young King, and said, ‘My lord, I pray  thee set aside these black thoughts of thine, and put on this fair robe,  and set this crown upon thy head.
For how shall the people know that  thou art a king, if thou hast not a king’s raiment?’    And the young King looked at him.
‘Is it so, indeed?’ he questioned.
‘Will they not know me for a king if I have not a king’s raiment?’    ‘They will not know thee, my lord,’ cried the Chamberlain.
‘I had thought that there had been men who were kinglike,’ he answered,  ‘but it may be as thou sayest.
And yet I will not wear this robe, nor  will I be crowned with this crown, but even as I came to the palace so  will I go forth from it.’    And he bade them all leave him, save one page whom he kept as his  companion, a lad a year younger than himself.
Him he kept for his  service, and when he had bathed himself in clear water, he opened a great  painted chest, and from it he took the leathern tunic and rough sheepskin  cloak that he had worn when he had watched on the hillside the shaggy  goats of the goatherd.
These he put on, and in his hand he took his rude  shepherd’s staff.
And the little page opened his big blue eyes in wonder, and said smiling  to him, ‘My lord, I see thy robe and thy sceptre, but where is thy  crown?’    And the young King plucked a spray of wild briar that was climbing over  the balcony, and bent it, and made a circlet of it, and set it on his own  head.
‘This shall he my crown,’ he answered.
And thus attired he passed out of his chamber into the Great Hall, where  the nobles were waiting for him.
And the nobles made merry, and some of them cried out to him, ‘My lord,  the people wait for their king, and thou showest them a beggar,’ and  others were wroth and said, ‘He brings shame upon our state, and is  unworthy to be our master.’  But he answered them not a word, but passed  on, and went down the bright porphyry staircase, and out through the  gates of bronze, and mounted upon his horse, and rode towards the  cathedral, the little page running beside him.
And the people laughed and said, ‘It is the King’s fool who is riding  by,’ and they mocked him.
And he drew rein and said, ‘Nay, but I am the King.’  And he told them  his three dreams.
And a man came out of the crowd and spake bitterly to him, and said,  ‘Sir, knowest thou not that out of the luxury of the rich cometh the life  of the poor?
By your pomp we are nurtured, and your vices give us bread.
To toil for a hard master is bitter, but to have no master to toil for is  more bitter still.
Thinkest thou that the ravens will feed us?
And what  cure hast thou for these things?
Wilt thou say to the buyer, “Thou shalt  buy for so much,” and to the seller, “Thou shalt sell at this price”?
I  trow not.
Therefore go back to thy Palace and put on thy purple and fine  linen.
What hast thou to do with us, and what we suffer?’    ‘Are not the rich and the poor brothers?’ asked the young King.
‘Ay,’ answered the man, ‘and the name of the rich brother is Cain.’    And the young King’s eyes filled with tears, and he rode on through the  murmurs of the people, and the little page grew afraid and left him.
And when he reached the great portal of the cathedral, the soldiers  thrust their halberts out and said, ‘What dost thou seek here?
None  enters by this door but the King.’    And his face flushed with anger, and he said to them, ‘I am the King,’  and waved their halberts aside and passed in.
And when the old Bishop saw him coming in his goatherd’s dress, he rose  up in wonder from his throne, and went to meet him, and said to him, ‘My  son, is this a king’s apparel?
And with what crown shall I crown thee,  and what sceptre shall I place in thy hand?
Surely this should be to  thee a day of joy, and not a day of abasement.’    ‘Shall Joy wear what Grief has fashioned?’ said the young King.
And he  told him his three dreams.
And when the Bishop had heard them he knit his brows, and said, ‘My son,  I am an old man, and in the winter of my days, and I know that many evil  things are done in the wide world.
The fierce robbers come down from the  mountains, and carry off the little children, and sell them to the Moors.
The lions lie in wait for the caravans, and leap upon the camels.
The  wild boar roots up the corn in the valley, and the foxes gnaw the vines  upon the hill.
The pirates lay waste the sea-coast and burn the ships of  the fishermen, and take their nets from them.
In the salt-marshes live  the lepers; they have houses of wattled reeds, and none may come nigh  them.
The beggars wander through the cities, and eat their food with the  dogs.
Canst thou make these things not to be?
Wilt thou take the leper  for thy bedfellow, and set the beggar at thy board?
Shall the lion do  thy bidding, and the wild boar obey thee?
Is not He who made misery  wiser than thou art?
Wherefore I praise thee not for this that thou hast  done, but I bid thee ride back to the Palace and make thy face glad, and  put on the raiment that beseemeth a king, and with the crown of gold I  will crown thee, and the sceptre of pearl will I place in thy hand.
And  as for thy dreams, think no more of them.
The burden of this world is  too great for one man to bear, and the world’s sorrow too heavy for one  heart to suffer.’    ‘Sayest thou that in this house?’ said the young King, and he strode past  the Bishop, and climbed up the steps of the altar, and stood before the  image of Christ.
He stood before the image of Christ, and on his right hand and on his  left were the marvellous vessels of gold, the chalice with the yellow  wine, and the vial with the holy oil.
He knelt before the image of  Christ, and the great candles burned brightly by the jewelled shrine, and  the smoke of the incense curled in thin blue wreaths through the dome.
He bowed his head in prayer, and the priests in their stiff copes crept  away from the altar.
And suddenly a wild tumult came from the street outside, and in entered  the nobles with drawn swords and nodding plumes, and shields of polished  steel.
‘Where is this dreamer of dreams?’ they cried.
‘Where is this  King who is apparelled like a beggar—this boy who brings shame upon our  state?
Surely we will slay him, for he is unworthy to rule over us.’    And the young King bowed his head again, and prayed, and when he had  finished his prayer he rose up, and turning round he looked at them  sadly.
And lo! through the painted windows came the sunlight streaming upon him,  and the sun-beams wove round him a tissued robe that was fairer than the  robe that had been fashioned for his pleasure.
The dead staff blossomed,  and bare lilies that were whiter than pearls.
The dry thorn blossomed,  and bare roses that were redder than rubies.
Whiter than fine pearls  were the lilies, and their stems were of bright silver.
Redder than male  rubies were the roses, and their leaves were of beaten gold.
He stood there in the raiment of a king, and the gates of the jewelled  shrine flew open, and from the crystal of the many-rayed monstrance shone  a marvellous and mystical light.
He stood there in a king’s raiment, and  the Glory of God filled the place, and the saints in their carven niches  seemed to move.
In the fair raiment of a king he stood before them, and  the organ pealed out its music, and the trumpeters blew upon their  trumpets, and the singing boys sang.
And the people fell upon their knees in awe, and the nobles sheathed  their swords and did homage, and the Bishop’s face grew pale, and his  hands trembled.
‘A greater than I hath crowned thee,’ he cried, and he  knelt before him.
And the young King came down from the high altar, and passed home through  the midst of the people.
But no man dared look upon his face, for it was  like the face of an angel.
IT was the birthday of the Infanta.
She was just twelve years of age,  and the sun was shining brightly in the gardens of the palace.
Although she was a real Princess and the Infanta of Spain, she had only  one birthday every year, just like the children of quite poor people, so  it was naturally a matter of great importance to the whole country that  she should have a really fine day for the occasion.
And a really fine  day it certainly was.
The tall striped tulips stood straight up upon  their stalks, like long rows of soldiers, and looked defiantly across the  grass at the roses, and said: ‘We are quite as splendid as you are now.’  The purple butterflies fluttered about with gold dust on their wings,  visiting each flower in turn; the little lizards crept out of the  crevices of the wall, and lay basking in the white glare; and the  pomegranates split and cracked with the heat, and showed their bleeding  red hearts.
Even the pale yellow lemons, that hung in such profusion  from the mouldering trellis and along the dim arcades, seemed to have  caught a richer colour from the wonderful sunlight, and the magnolia  trees opened their great globe-like blossoms of folded ivory, and filled  the air with a sweet heavy perfume.
The little Princess herself walked up and down the terrace with her  companions, and played at hide and seek round the stone vases and the old  moss-grown statues.
On ordinary days she was only allowed to play with  children of her own rank, so she had always to play alone, but her  birthday was an exception, and the King had given orders that she was to  invite any of her young friends whom she liked to come and amuse  themselves with her.
There was a stately grace about these slim Spanish  children as they glided about, the boys with their large-plumed hats and  short fluttering cloaks, the girls holding up the trains of their long  brocaded gowns, and shielding the sun from their eyes with huge fans of  black and silver.
But the Infanta was the most graceful of all, and the  most tastefully attired, after the somewhat cumbrous fashion of the day.
Her robe was of grey satin, the skirt and the wide puffed sleeves heavily  embroidered with silver, and the stiff corset studded with rows of fine  pearls.
Two tiny slippers with big pink rosettes peeped out beneath her  dress as she walked.
Pink and pearl was her great gauze fan, and in her  hair, which like an aureole of faded gold stood out stiffly round her  pale little face, she had a beautiful white rose.
From a window in the palace the sad melancholy King watched them.
Behind  him stood his brother, Don Pedro of Aragon, whom he hated, and his  confessor, the Grand Inquisitor of Granada, sat by his side.
Sadder even  than usual was the King, for as he looked at the Infanta bowing with  childish gravity to the assembling counters, or laughing behind her fan  at the grim Duchess of Albuquerque who always accompanied her, he thought  of the young Queen, her mother, who but a short time before—so it seemed  to him—had come from the gay country of France, and had withered away in  the sombre splendour of the Spanish court, dying just six months after  the birth of her child, and before she had seen the almonds blossom twice  in the orchard, or plucked the second year’s fruit from the old gnarled  fig-tree that stood in the centre of the now grass-grown courtyard.
So  great had been his love for her that he had not suffered even the grave  to hide her from him.
She had been embalmed by a Moorish physician, who  in return for this service had been granted his life, which for heresy  and suspicion of magical practices had been already forfeited, men said,  to the Holy Office, and her body was still lying on its tapestried bier  in the black marble chapel of the Palace, just as the monks had borne her  in on that windy March day nearly twelve years before.
Once every month  the King, wrapped in a dark cloak and with a muffled lantern in his hand,  went in and knelt by her side calling out, ‘_Mi reina_!  _Mi reina_!’ and  sometimes breaking through the formal etiquette that in Spain governs  every separate action of life, and sets limits even to the sorrow of a  King, he would clutch at the pale jewelled hands in a wild agony of  grief, and try to wake by his mad kisses the cold painted face.
To-day he seemed to see her again, as he had seen her first at the Castle  of Fontainebleau, when he was but fifteen years of age, and she still  younger.
They had been formally betrothed on that occasion by the Papal  Nuncio in the presence of the French King and all the Court, and he had  returned to the Escurial bearing with him a little ringlet of yellow  hair, and the memory of two childish lips bending down to kiss his hand  as he stepped into his carriage.
Later on had followed the marriage,  hastily performed at Burgos, a small town on the frontier between the two  countries, and the grand public entry into Madrid with the customary  celebration of high mass at the Church of La Atocha, and a more than  usually solemn _auto-da-fé_, in which nearly three hundred heretics,  amongst whom were many Englishmen, had been delivered over to the secular  arm to be burned.
Certainly he had loved her madly, and to the ruin, many thought, of his  country, then at war with England for the possession of the empire of the  New World.
He had hardly ever permitted her to be out of his sight; for  her, he had forgotten, or seemed to have forgotten, all grave affairs of  State; and, with that terrible blindness that passion brings upon its  servants, he had failed to notice that the elaborate ceremonies by which  he sought to please her did but aggravate the strange malady from which  she suffered.
When she died he was, for a time, like one bereft of  reason.
Indeed, there is no doubt but that he would have formally  abdicated and retired to the great Trappist monastery at Granada, of  which he was already titular Prior, had he not been afraid to leave the  little Infanta at the mercy of his brother, whose cruelty, even in Spain,  was notorious, and who was suspected by many of having caused the Queen’s  death by means of a pair of poisoned gloves that he had presented to her  on the occasion of her visiting his castle in Aragon.
Even after the  expiration of the three years of public mourning that he had ordained  throughout his whole dominions by royal edict, he would never suffer his  ministers to speak about any new alliance, and when the Emperor himself  sent to him, and offered him the hand of the lovely Archduchess of  Bohemia, his niece, in marriage, he bade the ambassadors tell their  master that the King of Spain was already wedded to Sorrow, and that  though she was but a barren bride he loved her better than Beauty; an  answer that cost his crown the rich provinces of the Netherlands, which  soon after, at the Emperor’s instigation, revolted against him under the  leadership of some fanatics of the Reformed Church.
His whole married life, with its fierce, fiery-coloured joys and the  terrible agony of its sudden ending, seemed to come back to him to-day as  he watched the Infanta playing on the terrace.
She had all the Queen’s  pretty petulance of manner, the same wilful way of tossing her head, the  same proud curved beautiful mouth, the same wonderful smile—_vrai sourire  de France_ indeed—as she glanced up now and then at the window, or  stretched out her little hand for the stately Spanish gentlemen to kiss.
But the shrill laughter of the children grated on his ears, and the  bright pitiless sunlight mocked his sorrow, and a dull odour of strange  spices, spices such as embalmers use, seemed to taint—or was it  fancy?—the clear morning air.
He buried his face in his hands, and when  the Infanta looked up again the curtains had been drawn, and the King had  retired.
She made a little _moue_ of disappointment, and shrugged her shoulders.
Surely he might have stayed with her on her birthday.
What did the  stupid State-affairs matter?
Or had he gone to that gloomy chapel, where  the candles were always burning, and where she was never allowed to  enter?
How silly of him, when the sun was shining so brightly, and  everybody was so happy!  Besides, he would miss the sham bull-fight for  which the trumpet was already sounding, to say nothing of the puppet-show  and the other wonderful things.
Her uncle and the Grand Inquisitor were  much more sensible.
They had come out on the terrace, and paid her nice  compliments.
So she tossed her pretty head, and taking Don Pedro by the  hand, she walked slowly down the steps towards a long pavilion of purple  silk that had been erected at the end of the garden, the other children  following in strict order of precedence, those who had the longest names  going first.
A procession of noble boys, fantastically dressed as _toreadors_, came  out to meet her, and the young Count of Tierra-Nueva, a wonderfully  handsome lad of about fourteen years of age, uncovering his head with all  the grace of a born hidalgo and grandee of Spain, led her solemnly in to  a little gilt and ivory chair that was placed on a raised dais above the  arena.
The children grouped themselves all round, fluttering their big  fans and whispering to each other, and Don Pedro and the Grand Inquisitor  stood laughing at the entrance.
Even the Duchess—the Camerera-Mayor as  she was called—a thin, hard-featured woman with a yellow ruff, did not  look quite so bad-tempered as usual, and something like a chill smile  flitted across her wrinkled face and twitched her thin bloodless lips.
It certainly was a marvellous bull-fight, and much nicer, the Infanta  thought, than the real bull-fight that she had been brought to see at  Seville, on the occasion of the visit of the Duke of Parma to her father.
Some of the boys pranced about on richly-caparisoned hobby-horses  brandishing long javelins with gay streamers of bright ribands attached  to them; others went on foot waving their scarlet cloaks before the bull,  and vaulting lightly over the barrier when he charged them; and as for  the bull himself, he was just like a live bull, though he was only made  of wicker-work and stretched hide, and sometimes insisted on running  round the arena on his hind legs, which no live bull ever dreams of  doing.
He made a splendid fight of it too, and the children got so  excited that they stood up upon the benches, and waved their lace  handkerchiefs and cried out: _Bravo toro_!  _Bravo toro_! just as  sensibly as if they had been grown-up people.
At last, however, after a  prolonged combat, during which several of the hobby-horses were gored  through and through, and, their riders dismounted, the young Count of  Tierra-Nueva brought the bull to his knees, and having obtained  permission from the Infanta to give the _coup de grâce_, he plunged his  wooden sword into the neck of the animal with such violence that the head  came right off, and disclosed the laughing face of little Monsieur de  Lorraine, the son of the French Ambassador at Madrid.
The arena was then cleared amidst much applause, and the dead  hobby-horses dragged solemnly away by two Moorish pages in yellow and  black liveries, and after a short interlude, during which a French  posture-master performed upon the tightrope, some Italian puppets  appeared in the semi-classical tragedy of _Sophonisba_ on the stage of a  small theatre that had been built up for the purpose.
They acted so  well, and their gestures were so extremely natural, that at the close of  the play the eyes of the Infanta were quite dim with tears.
Indeed some  of the children really cried, and had to be comforted with sweetmeats,  and the Grand Inquisitor himself was so affected that he could not help  saying to Don Pedro that it seemed to him intolerable that things made  simply out of wood and coloured wax, and worked mechanically by wires,  should be so unhappy and meet with such terrible misfortunes.
An African juggler followed, who brought in a large flat basket covered  with a red cloth, and having placed it in the centre of the arena, he  took from his turban a curious reed pipe, and blew through it.
In a few  moments the cloth began to move, and as the pipe grew shriller and  shriller two green and gold snakes put out their strange wedge-shaped  heads and rose slowly up, swaying to and fro with the music as a plant  sways in the water.
The children, however, were rather frightened at  their spotted hoods and quick darting tongues, and were much more pleased  when the juggler made a tiny orange-tree grow out of the sand and bear  pretty white blossoms and clusters of real fruit; and when he took the  fan of the little daughter of the Marquess de Las-Torres, and changed it  into a blue bird that flew all round the pavilion and sang, their delight  and amazement knew no bounds.
The solemn minuet, too, performed by the  dancing boys from the church of Nuestra Senora Del Pilar, was charming.
The Infanta had never before seen this wonderful ceremony which takes  place every year at Maytime in front of the high altar of the Virgin, and  in her honour; and indeed none of the royal family of Spain had entered  the great cathedral of Saragossa since a mad priest, supposed by many to  have been in the pay of Elizabeth of England, had tried to administer a  poisoned wafer to the Prince of the Asturias.
So she had known only by  hearsay of ‘Our Lady’s Dance,’ as it was called, and it certainly was a  beautiful sight.
The boys wore old-fashioned court dresses of white  velvet, and their curious three-cornered hats were fringed with silver  and surmounted with huge plumes of ostrich feathers, the dazzling  whiteness of their costumes, as they moved about in the sunlight, being  still more accentuated by their swarthy faces and long black hair.
Everybody was fascinated by the grave dignity with which they moved  through the intricate figures of the dance, and by the elaborate grace of  their slow gestures, and stately bows, and when they had finished their  performance and doffed their great plumed hats to the Infanta, she  acknowledged their reverence with much courtesy, and made a vow that she  would send a large wax candle to the shrine of Our Lady of Pilar in  return for the pleasure that she had given her.
A troop of handsome Egyptians—as the gipsies were termed in those  days—then advanced into the arena, and sitting down cross-legs, in a  circle, began to play softly upon their zithers, moving their bodies to  the tune, and humming, almost below their breath, a low dreamy air.
When  they caught sight of Don Pedro they scowled at him, and some of them  looked terrified, for only a few weeks before he had had two of their  tribe hanged for sorcery in the market-place at Seville, but the pretty  Infanta charmed them as she leaned back peeping over her fan with her  great blue eyes, and they felt sure that one so lovely as she was could  never be cruel to anybody.
So they played on very gently and just  touching the cords of the zithers with their long pointed nails, and  their heads began to nod as though they were falling asleep.
Suddenly,  with a cry so shrill that all the children were startled and Don Pedro’s  hand clutched at the agate pommel of his dagger, they leapt to their feet  and whirled madly round the enclosure beating their tambourines, and  chaunting some wild love-song in their strange guttural language.
Then  at another signal they all flung themselves again to the ground and lay  there quite still, the dull strumming of the zithers being the only sound  that broke the silence.
After that they had done this several times,  they disappeared for a moment and came back leading a brown shaggy bear  by a chain, and carrying on their shoulders some little Barbary apes.
The bear stood upon his head with the utmost gravity, and the wizened  apes played all kinds of amusing tricks with two gipsy boys who seemed to  be their masters, and fought with tiny swords, and fired off guns, and  went through a regular soldier’s drill just like the King’s own  bodyguard.
In fact the gipsies were a great success.
But the funniest part of the whole morning’s entertainment, was  undoubtedly the dancing of the little Dwarf.
When he stumbled into the  arena, waddling on his crooked legs and wagging his huge misshapen head  from side to side, the children went off into a loud shout of delight,  and the Infanta herself laughed so much that the Camerera was obliged to  remind her that although there were many precedents in Spain for a King’s  daughter weeping before her equals, there were none for a Princess of the  blood royal making so merry before those who were her inferiors in birth.
The Dwarf, however, was really quite irresistible, and even at the  Spanish Court, always noted for its cultivated passion for the horrible,  so fantastic a little monster had never been seen.
It was his first  appearance, too.
He had been discovered only the day before, running  wild through the forest, by two of the nobles who happened to have been  hunting in a remote part of the great cork-wood that surrounded the town,  and had been carried off by them to the Palace as a surprise for the  Infanta; his father, who was a poor charcoal-burner, being but too well  pleased to get rid of so ugly and useless a child.
Perhaps the most  amusing thing about him was his complete unconsciousness of his own  grotesque appearance.
Indeed he seemed quite happy and full of the  highest spirits.
When the children laughed, he laughed as freely and as  joyously as any of them, and at the close of each dance he made them each  the funniest of bows, smiling and nodding at them just as if he was  really one of themselves, and not a little misshapen thing that Nature,  in some humourous mood, had fashioned for others to mock at.
As for the  Infanta, she absolutely fascinated him.
He could not keep his eyes off  her, and seemed to dance for her alone, and when at the close of the  performance, remembering how she had seen the great ladies of the Court  throw bouquets to Caffarelli, the famous Italian treble, whom the Pope  had sent from his own chapel to Madrid that he might cure the King’s  melancholy by the sweetness of his voice, she took out of her hair the  beautiful white rose, and partly for a jest and partly to tease the  Camerera, threw it to him across the arena with her sweetest smile, he  took the whole matter quite seriously, and pressing the flower to his  rough coarse lips he put his hand upon his heart, and sank on one knee  before her, grinning from ear to ear, and with his little bright eyes  sparkling with pleasure.
This so upset the gravity of the Infanta that she kept on laughing long  after the little Dwarf had ran out of the arena, and expressed a desire  to her uncle that the dance should be immediately repeated.
The  Camerera, however, on the plea that the sun was too hot, decided that it  would be better that her Highness should return without delay to the  Palace, where a wonderful feast had been already prepared for her,  including a real birthday cake with her own initials worked all over it  in painted sugar and a lovely silver flag waving from the top.
The  Infanta accordingly rose up with much dignity, and having given orders  that the little dwarf was to dance again for her after the hour of  siesta, and conveyed her thanks to the young Count of Tierra-Nueva for  his charming reception, she went back to her apartments, the children  following in the same order in which they had entered.
Now when the little Dwarf heard that he was to dance a second time before  the Infanta, and by her own express command, he was so proud that he ran  out into the garden, kissing the white rose in an absurd ecstasy of  pleasure, and making the most uncouth and clumsy gestures of delight.
The Flowers were quite indignant at his daring to intrude into their  beautiful home, and when they saw him capering up and down the walks, and  waving his arms above his head in such a ridiculous manner, they could  not restrain their feelings any longer.
‘He is really far too ugly to be allowed to play in any place where we  are,’ cried the Tulips.
‘He should drink poppy-juice, and go to sleep for a thousand years,’ said  the great scarlet Lilies, and they grew quite hot and angry.
‘He is a perfect horror!’ screamed the Cactus.
‘Why, he is twisted and  stumpy, and his head is completely out of proportion with his legs.
Really he makes me feel prickly all over, and if he comes near me I will  sting him with my thorns.’    ‘And he has actually got one of my best blooms,’ exclaimed the White  Rose-Tree.
‘I gave it to the Infanta this morning myself, as a birthday  present, and he has stolen it from her.’  And she called out: ‘Thief,  thief, thief!’ at the top of her voice.
Even the red Geraniums, who did not usually give themselves airs, and  were known to have a great many poor relations themselves, curled up in  disgust when they saw him, and when the Violets meekly remarked that  though he was certainly extremely plain, still he could not help it, they  retorted with a good deal of justice that that was his chief defect, and  that there was no reason why one should admire a person because he was  incurable; and, indeed, some of the Violets themselves felt that the  ugliness of the little Dwarf was almost ostentatious, and that he would  have shown much better taste if he had looked sad, or at least pensive,  instead of jumping about merrily, and throwing himself into such  grotesque and silly attitudes.
As for the old Sundial, who was an extremely remarkable individual, and  had once told the time of day to no less a person than the Emperor  Charles V.
himself, he was so taken aback by the little Dwarf’s  appearance, that he almost forgot to mark two whole minutes with his long  shadowy finger, and could not help saying to the great milk-white  Peacock, who was sunning herself on the balustrade, that every one knew  that the children of Kings were Kings, and that the children of  charcoal-burners were charcoal-burners, and that it was absurd to pretend  that it wasn’t so; a statement with which the Peacock entirely agreed,  and indeed screamed out, ‘Certainly, certainly,’ in such a loud, harsh  voice, that the gold-fish who lived in the basin of the cool splashing  fountain put their heads out of the water, and asked the huge stone  Tritons what on earth was the matter.
But somehow the Birds liked him.
They had seen him often in the forest,  dancing about like an elf after the eddying leaves, or crouched up in the  hollow of some old oak-tree, sharing his nuts with the squirrels.
They  did not mind his being ugly, a bit.
Why, even the nightingale herself,  who sang so sweetly in the orange groves at night that sometimes the Moon  leaned down to listen, was not much to look at after all; and, besides,  he had been kind to them, and during that terribly bitter winter, when  there were no berries on the trees, and the ground was as hard as iron,  and the wolves had come down to the very gates of the city to look for  food, he had never once forgotten them, but had always given them crumbs  out of his little hunch of black bread, and divided with them whatever  poor breakfast he had.
So they flew round and round him, just touching his cheek with their  wings as they passed, and chattered to each other, and the little Dwarf  was so pleased that he could not help showing them the beautiful white  rose, and telling them that the Infanta herself had given it to him  because she loved him.
They did not understand a single word of what he was saying, but that  made no matter, for they put their heads on one side, and looked wise,  which is quite as good as understanding a thing, and very much easier.
The Lizards also took an immense fancy to him, and when he grew tired of  running about and flung himself down on the grass to rest, they played  and romped all over him, and tried to amuse him in the best way they  could.
‘Every one cannot be as beautiful as a lizard,’ they cried; ‘that  would be too much to expect.
And, though it sounds absurd to say so, he  is really not so ugly after all, provided, of course, that one shuts  one’s eyes, and does not look at him.’  The Lizards were extremely  philosophical by nature, and often sat thinking for hours and hours  together, when there was nothing else to do, or when the weather was too  rainy for them to go out.
The Flowers, however, were excessively annoyed at their behaviour, and at  the behaviour of the birds.
‘It only shows,’ they said, ‘what a  vulgarising effect this incessant rushing and flying about has.
Well-bred people always stay exactly in the same place, as we do.
No one  ever saw us hopping up and down the walks, or galloping madly through the  grass after dragon-flies.
When we do want change of air, we send for the  gardener, and he carries us to another bed.
This is dignified, and as it  should be.
But birds and lizards have no sense of repose, and indeed  birds have not even a permanent address.
They are mere vagrants like the  gipsies, and should be treated in exactly the same manner.’  So they put  their noses in the air, and looked very haughty, and were quite delighted  when after some time they saw the little Dwarf scramble up from the  grass, and make his way across the terrace to the palace.
‘He should certainly be kept indoors for the rest of his natural life,’  they said.
‘Look at his hunched back, and his crooked legs,’ and they  began to titter.
But the little Dwarf knew nothing of all this.
He liked the birds and  the lizards immensely, and thought that the flowers were the most  marvellous things in the whole world, except of course the Infanta, but  then she had given him the beautiful white rose, and she loved him, and  that made a great difference.
How he wished that he had gone back with  her!  She would have put him on her right hand, and smiled at him, and he  would have never left her side, but would have made her his playmate, and  taught her all kinds of delightful tricks.
For though he had never been  in a palace before, he knew a great many wonderful things.
He could make  little cages out of rushes for the grasshoppers to sing in, and fashion  the long jointed bamboo into the pipe that Pan loves to hear.
He knew  the cry of every bird, and could call the starlings from the tree-top, or  the heron from the mere.
He knew the trail of every animal, and could  track the hare by its delicate footprints, and the boar by the trampled  leaves.
All the wild-dances he knew, the mad dance in red raiment with  the autumn, the light dance in blue sandals over the corn, the dance with  white snow-wreaths in winter, and the blossom-dance through the orchards  in spring.
He knew where the wood-pigeons built their nests, and once  when a fowler had snared the parent birds, he had brought up the young  ones himself, and had built a little dovecot for them in the cleft of a  pollard elm.
They were quite tame, and used to feed out of his hands  every morning.
She would like them, and the rabbits that scurried about  in the long fern, and the jays with their steely feathers and black  bills, and the hedgehogs that could curl themselves up into prickly  balls, and the great wise tortoises that crawled slowly about, shaking  their heads and nibbling at the young leaves.
Yes, she must certainly  come to the forest and play with him.
He would give her his own little  bed, and would watch outside the window till dawn, to see that the wild  horned cattle did not harm her, nor the gaunt wolves creep too near the  hut.
And at dawn he would tap at the shutters and wake her, and they  would go out and dance together all the day long.
It was really not a  bit lonely in the forest.
Sometimes a Bishop rode through on his white  mule, reading out of a painted book.
Sometimes in their green velvet  caps, and their jerkins of tanned deerskin, the falconers passed by, with  hooded hawks on their wrists.
At vintage-time came the grape-treaders,  with purple hands and feet, wreathed with glossy ivy and carrying  dripping skins of wine; and the charcoal-burners sat round their huge  braziers at night, watching the dry logs charring slowly in the fire, and  roasting chestnuts in the ashes, and the robbers came out of their caves  and made merry with them.
Once, too, he had seen a beautiful procession  winding up the long dusty road to Toledo.
The monks went in front  singing sweetly, and carrying bright banners and crosses of gold, and  then, in silver armour, with matchlocks and pikes, came the soldiers, and  in their midst walked three barefooted men, in strange yellow dresses  painted all over with wonderful figures, and carrying lighted candles in  their hands.
Certainly there was a great deal to look at in the forest,  and when she was tired he would find a soft bank of moss for her, or  carry her in his arms, for he was very strong, though he knew that he was  not tall.
He would make her a necklace of red bryony berries, that would  be quite as pretty as the white berries that she wore on her dress, and  when she was tired of them, she could throw them away, and he would find  her others.
He would bring her acorn-cups and dew-drenched anemones, and  tiny glow-worms to be stars in the pale gold of her hair.
But where was she?
He asked the white rose, and it made him no answer.
The whole palace seemed asleep, and even where the shutters had not been  closed, heavy curtains had been drawn across the windows to keep out the  glare.
He wandered all round looking for some place through which he  might gain an entrance, and at last he caught sight of a little private  door that was lying open.
He slipped through, and found himself in a  splendid hall, far more splendid, he feared, than the forest, there was  so much more gilding everywhere, and even the floor was made of great  coloured stones, fitted together into a sort of geometrical pattern.
But  the little Infanta was not there, only some wonderful white statues that  looked down on him from their jasper pedestals, with sad blank eyes and  strangely smiling lips.
At the end of the hall hung a richly embroidered curtain of black velvet,  powdered with suns and stars, the King’s favourite devices, and broidered  on the colour he loved best.
Perhaps she was hiding behind that?
He  would try at any rate.
So he stole quietly across, and drew it aside.
No; there was only  another room, though a prettier room, he thought, than the one he had  just left.
The walls were hung with a many-figured green arras of  needle-wrought tapestry representing a hunt, the work of some Flemish  artists who had spent more than seven years in its composition.
It had  once been the chamber of _Jean le Fou_, as he was called, that mad King  who was so enamoured of the chase, that he had often tried in his  delirium to mount the huge rearing horses, and to drag down the stag on  which the great hounds were leaping, sounding his hunting horn, and  stabbing with his dagger at the pale flying deer.
It was now used as the  council-room, and on the centre table were lying the red portfolios of  the ministers, stamped with the gold tulips of Spain, and with the arms  and emblems of the house of Hapsburg.
The little Dwarf looked in wonder all round him, and was half-afraid to  go on.
The strange silent horsemen that galloped so swiftly through the  long glades without making any noise, seemed to him like those terrible  phantoms of whom he had heard the charcoal-burners speaking—the  Comprachos, who hunt only at night, and if they meet a man, turn him into  a hind, and chase him.
But he thought of the pretty Infanta, and took  courage.
He wanted to find her alone, and to tell her that he too loved  her.
Perhaps she was in the room beyond.
He ran across the soft Moorish carpets, and opened the door.
No!  She  was not here either.
The room was quite empty.
It was a throne-room, used for the reception of foreign ambassadors, when  the King, which of late had not been often, consented to give them a  personal audience; the same room in which, many years before, envoys had  appeared from England to make arrangements for the marriage of their  Queen, then one of the Catholic sovereigns of Europe, with the Emperor’s  eldest son.
The hangings were of gilt Cordovan leather, and a heavy gilt  chandelier with branches for three hundred wax lights hung down from the  black and white ceiling.
Underneath a great canopy of gold cloth, on  which the lions and towers of Castile were broidered in seed pearls,  stood the throne itself, covered with a rich pall of black velvet studded  with silver tulips and elaborately fringed with silver and pearls.
On  the second step of the throne was placed the kneeling-stool of the  Infanta, with its cushion of cloth of silver tissue, and below that  again, and beyond the limit of the canopy, stood the chair for the Papal  Nuncio, who alone had the right to be seated in the King’s presence on  the occasion of any public ceremonial, and whose Cardinal’s hat, with its  tangled scarlet tassels, lay on a purple _tabouret_ in front.
On the  wall, facing the throne, hung a life-sized portrait of Charles V.
in  hunting dress, with a great mastiff by his side, and a picture of Philip  II.
receiving the homage of the Netherlands occupied the centre of the  other wall.
Between the windows stood a black ebony cabinet, inlaid with  plates of ivory, on which the figures from Holbein’s Dance of Death had  been graved—by the hand, some said, of that famous master himself.
But the little Dwarf cared nothing for all this magnificence.
He would  not have given his rose for all the pearls on the canopy, nor one white  petal of his rose for the throne itself.
What he wanted was to see the  Infanta before she went down to the pavilion, and to ask her to come away  with him when he had finished his dance.
Here, in the Palace, the air  was close and heavy, but in the forest the wind blew free, and the  sunlight with wandering hands of gold moved the tremulous leaves aside.
There were flowers, too, in the forest, not so splendid, perhaps, as the  flowers in the garden, but more sweetly scented for all that; hyacinths  in early spring that flooded with waving purple the cool glens, and  grassy knolls; yellow primroses that nestled in little clumps round the  gnarled roots of the oak-trees; bright celandine, and blue speedwell, and  irises lilac and gold.
There were grey catkins on the hazels, and the  foxgloves drooped with the weight of their dappled bee-haunted cells.
The chestnut had its spires of white stars, and the hawthorn its pallid  moons of beauty.
Yes: surely she would come if he could only find her!  She would come with him to the fair forest, and all day long he would  dance for her delight.
A smile lit up his eyes at the thought, and he  passed into the next room.
Of all the rooms this was the brightest and the most beautiful.
The  walls were covered with a pink-flowered Lucca damask, patterned with  birds and dotted with dainty blossoms of silver; the furniture was of  massive silver, festooned with florid wreaths, and swinging Cupids; in  front of the two large fire-places stood great screens broidered with  parrots and peacocks, and the floor, which was of sea-green onyx, seemed  to stretch far away into the distance.
Nor was he alone.
Standing under  the shadow of the doorway, at the extreme end of the room, he saw a  little figure watching him.
His heart trembled, a cry of joy broke from  his lips, and he moved out into the sunlight.
As he did so, the figure  moved out also, and he saw it plainly.
The Infanta!  It was a monster, the most grotesque monster he had ever  beheld.
Not properly shaped, as all other people were, but hunchbacked,  and crooked-limbed, with huge lolling head and mane of black hair.
The  little Dwarf frowned, and the monster frowned also.
He laughed, and it  laughed with him, and held its hands to its sides, just as he himself was  doing.
He made it a mocking bow, and it returned him a low reverence.
He went towards it, and it came to meet him, copying each step that he  made, and stopping when he stopped himself.
He shouted with amusement,  and ran forward, and reached out his hand, and the hand of the monster  touched his, and it was as cold as ice.
He grew afraid, and moved his  hand across, and the monster’s hand followed it quickly.
He tried to  press on, but something smooth and hard stopped him.
The face of the  monster was now close to his own, and seemed full of terror.
He brushed  his hair off his eyes.
It imitated him.
He struck at it, and it  returned blow for blow.
He loathed it, and it made hideous faces at him.
He drew back, and it retreated.
What is it?
He thought for a moment, and looked round at the rest of the  room.
It was strange, but everything seemed to have its double in this  invisible wall of clear water.
Yes, picture for picture was repeated,  and couch for couch.
The sleeping Faun that lay in the alcove by the  doorway had its twin brother that slumbered, and the silver Venus that  stood in the sunlight held out her arms to a Venus as lovely as herself.
Was it Echo?
He had called to her once in the valley, and she had  answered him word for word.
Could she mock the eye, as she mocked the  voice?
Could she make a mimic world just like the real world?
Could the  shadows of things have colour and life and movement?
Could it be that—?
He started, and taking from his breast the beautiful white rose, he  turned round, and kissed it.
The monster had a rose of its own, petal  for petal the same!  It kissed it with like kisses, and pressed it to its  heart with horrible gestures.
When the truth dawned upon him, he gave a wild cry of despair, and fell  sobbing to the ground.
So it was he who was misshapen and hunchbacked,  foul to look at and grotesque.
He himself was the monster, and it was at  him that all the children had been laughing, and the little Princess who  he had thought loved him—she too had been merely mocking at his ugliness,  and making merry over his twisted limbs.
Why had they not left him in  the forest, where there was no mirror to tell him how loathsome he was?
Why had his father not killed him, rather than sell him to his shame?
The hot tears poured down his cheeks, and he tore the white rose to  pieces.
The sprawling monster did the same, and scattered the faint  petals in the air.
It grovelled on the ground, and, when he looked at  it, it watched him with a face drawn with pain.
He crept away, lest he  should see it, and covered his eyes with his hands.
He crawled, like  some wounded thing, into the shadow, and lay there moaning.
And at that moment the Infanta herself came in with her companions  through the open window, and when they saw the ugly little dwarf lying on  the ground and beating the floor with his clenched hands, in the most  fantastic and exaggerated manner, they went off into shouts of happy  laughter, and stood all round him and watched him.
‘His dancing was funny,’ said the Infanta; ‘but his acting is funnier  still.
Indeed he is almost as good as the puppets, only of course not  quite so natural.’  And she fluttered her big fan, and applauded.
But the little Dwarf never looked up, and his sobs grew fainter and  fainter, and suddenly he gave a curious gasp, and clutched his side.
And  then he fell back again, and lay quite still.
‘That is capital,’ said the Infanta, after a pause; ‘but now you must  dance for me.’    ‘Yes,’ cried all the children, ‘you must get up and dance, for you are as  clever as the Barbary apes, and much more ridiculous.’  But the little  Dwarf made no answer.
And the Infanta stamped her foot, and called out to her uncle, who was  walking on the terrace with the Chamberlain, reading some despatches that  had just arrived from Mexico, where the Holy Office had recently been  established.
‘My funny little dwarf is sulking,’ she cried, ‘you must  wake him up, and tell him to dance for me.’    They smiled at each other, and sauntered in, and Don Pedro stooped down,  and slapped the Dwarf on the cheek with his embroidered glove.
‘You must  dance,’ he said, ‘_petit monsire_.
You must dance.
The Infanta of Spain  and the Indies wishes to be amused.’    But the little Dwarf never moved.
‘A whipping master should be sent for,’ said Don Pedro wearily, and he  went back to the terrace.
But the Chamberlain looked grave, and he knelt  beside the little dwarf, and put his hand upon his heart.
And after a  few moments he shrugged his shoulders, and rose up, and having made a low  bow to the Infanta, he said—    ‘_Mi bella Princesa_, your funny little dwarf will never dance again.
It  is a pity, for he is so ugly that he might have made the King smile.’    ‘But why will he not dance again?’ asked the Infanta, laughing.
‘Because his heart is broken,’ answered the Chamberlain.
And the Infanta frowned, and her dainty rose-leaf lips curled in pretty  disdain.
‘For the future let those who come to play with me have no  hearts,’ she cried, and she ran out into the garden.
THE FISHERMAN AND HIS SOUL                                      TO H.S.H.                               ALICE, PRINCESS                                  OF MONACO    EVERY evening the young Fisherman went out upon the sea, and threw his  nets into the water.
When the wind blew from the land he caught nothing, or but little at  best, for it was a bitter and black-winged wind, and rough waves rose up  to meet it.
But when the wind blew to the shore, the fish came in from  the deep, and swam into the meshes of his nets, and he took them to the  market-place and sold them.
Every evening he went out upon the sea, and one evening the net was so  heavy that hardly could he draw it into the boat.
And he laughed, and  said to himself, ‘Surely I have caught all the fish that swim, or snared  some dull monster that will be a marvel to men, or some thing of horror  that the great Queen will desire,’ and putting forth all his strength, he  tugged at the coarse ropes till, like lines of blue enamel round a vase  of bronze, the long veins rose up on his arms.
He tugged at the thin  ropes, and nearer and nearer came the circle of flat corks, and the net  rose at last to the top of the water.
But no fish at all was in it, nor any monster or thing of horror, but  only a little Mermaid lying fast asleep.
Her hair was as a wet fleece of gold, and each separate hair as a thread  of fine gold in a cup of glass.
Her body was as white ivory, and her  tail was of silver and pearl.
Silver and pearl was her tail, and the  green weeds of the sea coiled round it; and like sea-shells were her  ears, and her lips were like sea-coral.
The cold waves dashed over her  cold breasts, and the salt glistened upon her eyelids.
So beautiful was she that when the young Fisherman saw her he was filled  with wonder, and he put out his hand and drew the net close to him, and  leaning over the side he clasped her in his arms.
And when he touched  her, she gave a cry like a startled sea-gull, and woke, and looked at him  in terror with her mauve-amethyst eyes, and struggled that she might  escape.
But he held her tightly to him, and would not suffer her to  depart.
And when she saw that she could in no way escape from him, she began to  weep, and said, ‘I pray thee let me go, for I am the only daughter of a  King, and my father is aged and alone.’    But the young Fisherman answered, ‘I will not let thee go save thou  makest me a promise that whenever I call thee, thou wilt come and sing to  me, for the fish delight to listen to the song of the Sea-folk, and so  shall my nets be full.’    ‘Wilt thou in very truth let me go, if I promise thee this?’ cried the  Mermaid.
‘In very truth I will let thee go,’ said the young Fisherman.
So she made him the promise he desired, and sware it by the oath of the  Sea-folk.
And he loosened his arms from about her, and she sank down  into the water, trembling with a strange fear.
Every evening the young Fisherman went out upon the sea, and called to  the Mermaid, and she rose out of the water and sang to him.
Round and  round her swam the dolphins, and the wild gulls wheeled above her head.
And she sang a marvellous song.
For she sang of the Sea-folk who drive  their flocks from cave to cave, and carry the little calves on their  shoulders; of the Tritons who have long green beards, and hairy breasts,  and blow through twisted conchs when the King passes by; of the palace of  the King which is all of amber, with a roof of clear emerald, and a  pavement of bright pearl; and of the gardens of the sea where the great  filigrane fans of coral wave all day long, and the fish dart about like  silver birds, and the anemones cling to the rocks, and the pinks bourgeon  in the ribbed yellow sand.
She sang of the big whales that come down  from the north seas and have sharp icicles hanging to their fins; of the  Sirens who tell of such wonderful things that the merchants have to stop  their ears with wax lest they should hear them, and leap into the water  and be drowned; of the sunken galleys with their tall masts, and the  frozen sailors clinging to the rigging, and the mackerel swimming in and  out of the open portholes; of the little barnacles who are great  travellers, and cling to the keels of the ships and go round and round  the world; and of the cuttlefish who live in the sides of the cliffs and  stretch out their long black arms, and can make night come when they will  it.
She sang of the nautilus who has a boat of her own that is carved  out of an opal and steered with a silken sail; of the happy Mermen who  play upon harps and can charm the great Kraken to sleep; of the little  children who catch hold of the slippery porpoises and ride laughing upon  their backs; of the Mermaids who lie in the white foam and hold out their  arms to the mariners; and of the sea-lions with their curved tusks, and  the sea-horses with their floating manes.
And as she sang, all the tunny-fish came in from the deep to listen to  her, and the young Fisherman threw his nets round them and caught them,  and others he took with a spear.
And when his boat was well-laden, the  Mermaid would sink down into the sea, smiling at him.
Yet would she never come near him that he might touch her.
Oftentimes he  called to her and prayed of her, but she would not; and when he sought to  seize her she dived into the water as a seal might dive, nor did he see  her again that day.
And each day the sound of her voice became sweeter  to his ears.
So sweet was her voice that he forgot his nets and his  cunning, and had no care of his craft.
Vermilion-finned and with eyes of  bossy gold, the tunnies went by in shoals, but he heeded them not.
His  spear lay by his side unused, and his baskets of plaited osier were  empty.
With lips parted, and eyes dim with wonder, he sat idle in his  boat and listened, listening till the sea-mists crept round him, and the  wandering moon stained his brown limbs with silver.
And one evening he called to her, and said: ‘Little Mermaid, little  Mermaid, I love thee.
Take me for thy bridegroom, for I love thee.’    But the Mermaid shook her head.
‘Thou hast a human soul,’ she answered.
‘If only thou wouldst send away thy soul, then could I love thee.’    And the young Fisherman said to himself, ‘Of what use is my soul to me?
I cannot see it.
I may not touch it.
I do not know it.
Surely I will  send it away from me, and much gladness shall be mine.’  And a cry of joy  broke from his lips, and standing up in the painted boat, he held out his  arms to the Mermaid.
‘I will send my soul away,’ he cried, ‘and you  shall be my bride, and I will be thy bridegroom, and in the depth of the  sea we will dwell together, and all that thou hast sung of thou shalt  show me, and all that thou desirest I will do, nor shall our lives be  divided.’    And the little Mermaid laughed for pleasure and hid her face in her  hands.
‘But how shall I send my soul from me?’ cried the young Fisherman.
‘Tell  me how I may do it, and lo! it shall be done.’    ‘Alas!  I know not,’ said the little Mermaid: ‘the Sea-folk have no  souls.’  And she sank down into the deep, looking wistfully at him.
Now early on the next morning, before the sun was the span of a man’s  hand above the hill, the young Fisherman went to the house of the Priest  and knocked three times at the door.
The novice looked out through the wicket, and when he saw who it was, he  drew back the latch and said to him, ‘Enter.’    And the young Fisherman passed in, and knelt down on the sweet-smelling  rushes of the floor, and cried to the Priest who was reading out of the  Holy Book and said to him, ‘Father, I am in love with one of the  Sea-folk, and my soul hindereth me from having my desire.
Tell me how I  can send my soul away from me, for in truth I have no need of it.
Of  what value is my soul to me?
I cannot see it.
I may not touch it.
I do  not know it.’    And the Priest beat his breast, and answered, ‘Alack, alack, thou art  mad, or hast eaten of some poisonous herb, for the soul is the noblest  part of man, and was given to us by God that we should nobly use it.
There is no thing more precious than a human soul, nor any earthly thing  that can be weighed with it.
It is worth all the gold that is in the  world, and is more precious than the rubies of the kings.
Therefore, my  son, think not any more of this matter, for it is a sin that may not be  forgiven.
And as for the Sea-folk, they are lost, and they who would  traffic with them are lost also.
They are as the beasts of the field  that know not good from evil, and for them the Lord has not died.’    The young Fisherman’s eyes filled with tears when he heard the bitter  words of the Priest, and he rose up from his knees and said to him,  ‘Father, the Fauns live in the forest and are glad, and on the rocks sit  the Mermen with their harps of red gold.
Let me be as they are, I  beseech thee, for their days are as the days of flowers.
And as for my  soul, what doth my soul profit me, if it stand between me and the thing  that I love?’    ‘The love of the body is vile,’ cried the Priest, knitting his brows,  ‘and vile and evil are the pagan things God suffers to wander through His  world.
Accursed be the Fauns of the woodland, and accursed be the  singers of the sea!  I have heard them at night-time, and they have  sought to lure me from my beads.
They tap at the window, and laugh.
They whisper into my ears the tale of their perilous joys.
They tempt me  with temptations, and when I would pray they make mouths at me.
They are  lost, I tell thee, they are lost.
For them there is no heaven nor hell,  and in neither shall they praise God’s name.’    ‘Father,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘thou knowest not what thou sayest.
Once in my net I snared the daughter of a King.
She is fairer than the  morning star, and whiter than the moon.
For her body I would give my  soul, and for her love I would surrender heaven.
Tell me what I ask of  thee, and let me go in peace.’    ‘Away!  Away!’ cried the Priest: ‘thy leman is lost, and thou shalt be  lost with her.’    And he gave him no blessing, but drove him from his door.
And the young Fisherman went down into the market-place, and he walked  slowly, and with bowed head, as one who is in sorrow.
And when the merchants saw him coming, they began to whisper to each  other, and one of them came forth to meet him, and called him by name,  and said to him, ‘What hast thou to sell?’    ‘I will sell thee my soul,’ he answered.
‘I pray thee buy it of me, for  I am weary of it.
Of what use is my soul to me?
I cannot see it.
I may  not touch it.
I do not know it.’    But the merchants mocked at him, and said, ‘Of what use is a man’s soul  to us?
It is not worth a clipped piece of silver.
Sell us thy body for  a slave, and we will clothe thee in sea-purple, and put a ring upon thy  finger, and make thee the minion of the great Queen.
But talk not of the  soul, for to us it is nought, nor has it any value for our service.’    And the young Fisherman said to himself: ‘How strange a thing this is!  The Priest telleth me that the soul is worth all the gold in the world,  and the merchants say that it is not worth a clipped piece of silver.’  And he passed out of the market-place, and went down to the shore of the  sea, and began to ponder on what he should do.
And at noon he remembered how one of his companions, who was a gatherer  of samphire, had told him of a certain young Witch who dwelt in a cave at  the head of the bay and was very cunning in her witcheries.
And he set  to and ran, so eager was he to get rid of his soul, and a cloud of dust  followed him as he sped round the sand of the shore.
By the itching of  her palm the young Witch knew his coming, and she laughed and let down  her red hair.
With her red hair falling around her, she stood at the  opening of the cave, and in her hand she had a spray of wild hemlock that  was blossoming.
‘What d’ye lack?
What d’ye lack?’ she cried, as he came panting up the  steep, and bent down before her.
‘Fish for thy net, when the wind is  foul?
I have a little reed-pipe, and when I blow on it the mullet come  sailing into the bay.
But it has a price, pretty boy, it has a price.
What d’ye lack?
What d’ye lack?
A storm to wreck the ships, and wash  the chests of rich treasure ashore?
I have more storms than the wind  has, for I serve one who is stronger than the wind, and with a sieve and  a pail of water I can send the great galleys to the bottom of the sea.
But I have a price, pretty boy, I have a price.
What d’ye lack?
What  d’ye lack?
I know a flower that grows in the valley, none knows it but  I.
It has purple leaves, and a star in its heart, and its juice is as  white as milk.
Shouldst thou touch with this flower the hard lips of the  Queen, she would follow thee all over the world.
Out of the bed of the  King she would rise, and over the whole world she would follow thee.
And  it has a price, pretty boy, it has a price.
What d’ye lack?
What d’ye  lack?
I can pound a toad in a mortar, and make broth of it, and stir the  broth with a dead man’s hand.
Sprinkle it on thine enemy while he  sleeps, and he will turn into a black viper, and his own mother will slay  him.
With a wheel I can draw the Moon from heaven, and in a crystal I  can show thee Death.
What d’ye lack?
What d’ye lack?
Tell me thy  desire, and I will give it thee, and thou shalt pay me a price, pretty  boy, thou shalt pay me a price.’    ‘My desire is but for a little thing,’ said the young Fisherman, ‘yet  hath the Priest been wroth with me, and driven me forth.
It is but for a  little thing, and the merchants have mocked at me, and denied me.
Therefore am I come to thee, though men call thee evil, and whatever be  thy price I shall pay it.’    ‘What wouldst thou?’ asked the Witch, coming near to him.
‘I would send my soul away from me,’ answered the young Fisherman.
The Witch grew pale, and shuddered, and hid her face in her blue mantle.
‘Pretty boy, pretty boy,’ she muttered, ‘that is a terrible thing to do.’    He tossed his brown curls and laughed.
‘My soul is nought to me,’ he  answered.
‘I cannot see it.
I may not touch it.
I do not know it.’    ‘What wilt thou give me if I tell thee?’ asked the Witch, looking down at  him with her beautiful eyes.
‘Five pieces of gold,’ he said, ‘and my nets, and the wattled house where  I live, and the painted boat in which I sail.
Only tell me how to get  rid of my soul, and I will give thee all that I possess.’    She laughed mockingly at him, and struck him with the spray of hemlock.
‘I can turn the autumn leaves into gold,’ she answered, ‘and I can weave  the pale moonbeams into silver if I will it.
He whom I serve is richer  than all the kings of this world, and has their dominions.’    ‘What then shall I give thee,’ he cried, ‘if thy price be neither gold  nor silver?’    The Witch stroked his hair with her thin white hand.
‘Thou must dance  with me, pretty boy,’ she murmured, and she smiled at him as she spoke.
‘Nought but that?’ cried the young Fisherman in wonder and he rose to his  feet.
‘Nought but that,’ she answered, and she smiled at him again.
‘Then at sunset in some secret place we shall dance together,’ he said,  ‘and after that we have danced thou shalt tell me the thing which I  desire to know.’    She shook her head.
‘When the moon is full, when the moon is full,’ she  muttered.
Then she peered all round, and listened.
A blue bird rose  screaming from its nest and circled over the dunes, and three spotted  birds rustled through the coarse grey grass and whistled to each other.
There was no other sound save the sound of a wave fretting the smooth  pebbles below.
So she reached out her hand, and drew him near to her and  put her dry lips close to his ear.
‘To-night thou must come to the top of the mountain,’ she whispered.
‘It  is a Sabbath, and He will be there.’    The young Fisherman started and looked at her, and she showed her white  teeth and laughed.
‘Who is He of whom thou speakest?’ he asked.
‘It matters not,’ she answered.
‘Go thou to-night, and stand under the  branches of the hornbeam, and wait for my coming.
If a black dog run  towards thee, strike it with a rod of willow, and it will go away.
If an  owl speak to thee, make it no answer.
When the moon is full I shall be  with thee, and we will dance together on the grass.’    ‘But wilt thou swear to me to tell me how I may send my soul from me?’ he  made question.
She moved out into the sunlight, and through her red hair rippled the  wind.
‘By the hoofs of the goat I swear it,’ she made answer.
‘Thou art the best of the witches,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘and I  will surely dance with thee to-night on the top of the mountain.
I would  indeed that thou hadst asked of me either gold or silver.
But such as  thy price is thou shalt have it, for it is but a little thing.’  And he  doffed his cap to her, and bent his head low, and ran back to the town  filled with a great joy.
And the Witch watched him as he went, and when he had passed from her  sight she entered her cave, and having taken a mirror from a box of  carved cedarwood, she set it up on a frame, and burned vervain on lighted  charcoal before it, and peered through the coils of the smoke.
And after  a time she clenched her hands in anger.
‘He should have been mine,’ she  muttered, ‘I am as fair as she is.’                                            And that evening, when the moon had risen, the young Fisherman climbed up  to the top of the mountain, and stood under the branches of the hornbeam.
Like a targe of polished metal the round sea lay at his feet, and the  shadows of the fishing-boats moved in the little bay.
A great owl, with  yellow sulphurous eyes, called to him by his name, but he made it no  answer.
A black dog ran towards him and snarled.
He struck it with a  rod of willow, and it went away whining.
At midnight the witches came flying through the air like bats.
‘Phew!’  they cried, as they lit upon the ground, ‘there is some one here we know  not!’ and they sniffed about, and chattered to each other, and made  signs.
Last of all came the young Witch, with her red hair streaming in  the wind.
She wore a dress of gold tissue embroidered with peacocks’  eyes, and a little cap of green velvet was on her head.
‘Where is he, where is he?’ shrieked the witches when they saw her, but  she only laughed, and ran to the hornbeam, and taking the Fisherman by  the hand she led him out into the moonlight and began to dance.
Round and round they whirled, and the young Witch jumped so high that he  could see the scarlet heels of her shoes.
Then right across the dancers  came the sound of the galloping of a horse, but no horse was to be seen,  and he felt afraid.
‘Faster,’ cried the Witch, and she threw her arms about his neck, and her  breath was hot upon his face.
‘Faster, faster!’ she cried, and the earth  seemed to spin beneath his feet, and his brain grew troubled, and a great  terror fell on him, as of some evil thing that was watching him, and at  last he became aware that under the shadow of a rock there was a figure  that had not been there before.
It was a man dressed in a suit of black velvet, cut in the Spanish  fashion.
His face was strangely pale, but his lips were like a proud red  flower.
He seemed weary, and was leaning back toying in a listless  manner with the pommel of his dagger.
On the grass beside him lay a  plumed hat, and a pair of riding-gloves gauntleted with gilt lace, and  sewn with seed-pearls wrought into a curious device.
A short cloak lined  with sables hang from his shoulder, and his delicate white hands were  gemmed with rings.
Heavy eyelids drooped over his eyes.
The young Fisherman watched him, as one snared in a spell.
At last their  eyes met, and wherever he danced it seemed to him that the eyes of the  man were upon him.
He heard the Witch laugh, and caught her by the  waist, and whirled her madly round and round.
Suddenly a dog bayed in the wood, and the dancers stopped, and going up  two by two, knelt down, and kissed the man’s hands.
As they did so, a  little smile touched his proud lips, as a bird’s wing touches the water  and makes it laugh.
But there was disdain in it.
He kept looking at the  young Fisherman.
‘Come! let us worship,’ whispered the Witch, and she led him up, and a  great desire to do as she besought him seized on him, and he followed  her.
But when he came close, and without knowing why he did it, he made  on his breast the sign of the Cross, and called upon the holy name.
No sooner had he done so than the witches screamed like hawks and flew  away, and the pallid face that had been watching him twitched with a  spasm of pain.
The man went over to a little wood, and whistled.
A  jennet with silver trappings came running to meet him.
As he leapt upon  the saddle he turned round, and looked at the young Fisherman sadly.
And the Witch with the red hair tried to fly away also, but the Fisherman  caught her by her wrists, and held her fast.
‘Loose me,’ she cried, ‘and let me go.
For thou hast named what should  not be named, and shown the sign that may not be looked at.’    ‘Nay,’ he answered, ‘but I will not let thee go till thou hast told me  the secret.’    ‘What secret?’ said the Witch, wrestling with him like a wild cat, and  biting her foam-flecked lips.
‘Thou knowest,’ he made answer.
Her grass-green eyes grew dim with tears, and she said to the Fisherman,  ‘Ask me anything but that!’    He laughed, and held her all the more tightly.
And when she saw that she could not free herself, she whispered to him,  ‘Surely I am as fair as the daughters of the sea, and as comely as those  that dwell in the blue waters,’ and she fawned on him and put her face  close to his.
But he thrust her back frowning, and said to her, ‘If thou keepest not  the promise that thou madest to me I will slay thee for a false witch.’    She grew grey as a blossom of the Judas tree, and shuddered.
‘Be it so,’  she muttered.
‘It is thy soul and not mine.
Do with it as thou wilt.’  And she took from her girdle a little knife that had a handle of green  viper’s skin, and gave it to him.
‘What shall this serve me?’ he asked of her, wondering.
She was silent for a few moments, and a look of terror came over her  face.
Then she brushed her hair back from her forehead, and smiling  strangely she said to him, ‘What men call the shadow of the body is not  the shadow of the body, but is the body of the soul.
Stand on the  sea-shore with thy back to the moon, and cut away from around thy feet  thy shadow, which is thy soul’s body, and bid thy soul leave thee, and it  will do so.’    The young Fisherman trembled.
‘Is this true?’ he murmured.
‘It is true, and I would that I had not told thee of it,’ she cried, and  she clung to his knees weeping.
He put her from him and left her in the rank grass, and going to the edge  of the mountain he placed the knife in his belt and began to climb down.
And his Soul that was within him called out to him and said, ‘Lo!  I have  dwelt with thee for all these years, and have been thy servant.
Send me  not away from thee now, for what evil have I done thee?’    And the young Fisherman laughed.
‘Thou hast done me no evil, but I have  no need of thee,’ he answered.
‘The world is wide, and there is Heaven  also, and Hell, and that dim twilight house that lies between.
Go  wherever thou wilt, but trouble me not, for my love is calling to me.’    And his Soul besought him piteously, but he heeded it not, but leapt from  crag to crag, being sure-footed as a wild goat, and at last he reached  the level ground and the yellow shore of the sea.
Bronze-limbed and well-knit, like a statue wrought by a Grecian, he stood  on the sand with his back to the moon, and out of the foam came white  arms that beckoned to him, and out of the waves rose dim forms that did  him homage.
Before him lay his shadow, which was the body of his soul,  and behind him hung the moon in the honey-coloured air.
And his Soul said to him, ‘If indeed thou must drive me from thee, send  me not forth without a heart.
The world is cruel, give me thy heart to  take with me.’    He tossed his head and smiled.
‘With what should I love my love if I  gave thee my heart?’ he cried.
‘Nay, but be merciful,’ said his Soul: ‘give me thy heart, for the world  is very cruel, and I am afraid.’    ‘My heart is my love’s,’ he answered, ‘therefore tarry not, but get thee  gone.’    ‘Should I not love also?’ asked his Soul.
‘Get thee gone, for I have no need of thee,’ cried the young Fisherman,  and he took the little knife with its handle of green viper’s skin, and  cut away his shadow from around his feet, and it rose up and stood before  him, and looked at him, and it was even as himself.
He crept back, and thrust the knife into his belt, and a feeling of awe  came over him.
‘Get thee gone,’ he murmured, ‘and let me see thy face no  more.’    ‘Nay, but we must meet again,’ said the Soul.
Its voice was low and  flute-like, and its lips hardly moved while it spake.
‘How shall we meet?’ cried the young Fisherman.
‘Thou wilt not follow me  into the depths of the sea?’    ‘Once every year I will come to this place, and call to thee,’ said the  Soul.
‘It may be that thou wilt have need of me.’    ‘What need should I have of thee?’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘but be it  as thou wilt,’ and he plunged into the waters and the Tritons blew their  horns and the little Mermaid rose up to meet him, and put her arms around  his neck and kissed him on the mouth.
And the Soul stood on the lonely beach and watched them.
And when they  had sunk down into the sea, it went weeping away over the marshes.
And after a year was over the Soul came down to the shore of the sea and  called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep, and said,  ‘Why dost thou call to me?’    And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I  have seen marvellous things.’    So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head  upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘When I left thee I turned my face to the East  and journeyed.
From the East cometh everything that is wise.
Six days I  journeyed, and on the morning of the seventh day I came to a hill that is  in the country of the Tartars.
I sat down under the shade of a tamarisk  tree to shelter myself from the sun.
The land was dry and burnt up with  the heat.
The people went to and fro over the plain like flies crawling  upon a disk of polished copper.
‘When it was noon a cloud of red dust rose up from the flat rim of the  land.
When the Tartars saw it, they strung their painted bows, and  having leapt upon their little horses they galloped to meet it.
The  women fled screaming to the waggons, and hid themselves behind the felt  curtains.
‘At twilight the Tartars returned, but five of them were missing, and of  those that came back not a few had been wounded.
They harnessed their  horses to the waggons and drove hastily away.
Three jackals came out of  a cave and peered after them.
Then they sniffed up the air with their  nostrils, and trotted off in the opposite direction.
‘When the moon rose I saw a camp-fire burning on the plain, and went  towards it.
A company of merchants were seated round it on carpets.
Their camels were picketed behind them, and the negroes who were their  servants were pitching tents of tanned skin upon the sand, and making a  high wall of the prickly pear.
‘As I came near them, the chief of the merchants rose up and drew his  sword, and asked me my business.
‘I answered that I was a Prince in my own land, and that I had escaped  from the Tartars, who had sought to make me their slave.
The chief  smiled, and showed me five heads fixed upon long reeds of bamboo.
‘Then he asked me who was the prophet of God, and I answered him  Mohammed.
‘When he heard the name of the false prophet, he bowed and took me by the  hand, and placed me by his side.
A negro brought me some mare’s milk in  a wooden dish, and a piece of lamb’s flesh roasted.
‘At daybreak we started on our journey.
I rode on a red-haired camel by  the side of the chief, and a runner ran before us carrying a spear.
The  men of war were on either hand, and the mules followed with the  merchandise.
There were forty camels in the caravan, and the mules were  twice forty in number.
‘We went from the country of the Tartars into the country of those who  curse the Moon.
We saw the Gryphons guarding their gold on the white  rocks, and the scaled Dragons sleeping in their caves.
As we passed over  the mountains we held our breath lest the snows might fall on us, and  each man tied a veil of gauze before his eyes.
As we passed through the  valleys the Pygmies shot arrows at us from the hollows of the trees, and  at night-time we heard the wild men beating on their drums.
When we came  to the Tower of Apes we set fruits before them, and they did not harm us.
When we came to the Tower of Serpents we gave them warm milk in howls of  brass, and they let us go by.
Three times in our journey we came to the  banks of the Oxus.
We crossed it on rafts of wood with great bladders of  blown hide.
The river-horses raged against us and sought to slay us.
When the camels saw them they trembled.
‘The kings of each city levied tolls on us, but would not suffer us to  enter their gates.
They threw us bread over the walls, little  maize-cakes baked in honey and cakes of fine flour filled with dates.
For every hundred baskets we gave them a bead of amber.
‘When the dwellers in the villages saw us coming, they poisoned the wells  and fled to the hill-summits.
We fought with the Magadae who are born  old, and grow younger and younger every year, and die when they are  little children; and with the Laktroi who say that they are the sons of  tigers, and paint themselves yellow and black; and with the Aurantes who  bury their dead on the tops of trees, and themselves live in dark caverns  lest the Sun, who is their god, should slay them; and with the Krimnians  who worship a crocodile, and give it earrings of green glass, and feed it  with butter and fresh fowls; and with the Agazonbae, who are dog-faced;  and with the Sibans, who have horses’ feet, and run more swiftly than  horses.
A third of our company died in battle, and a third died of want.
The rest murmured against me, and said that I had brought them an evil  fortune.
I took a horned adder from beneath a stone and let it sting me.
When they saw that I did not sicken they grew afraid.
‘In the fourth month we reached the city of Illel.
It was night-time  when we came to the grove that is outside the walls, and the air was  sultry, for the Moon was travelling in Scorpion.
We took the ripe  pomegranates from the trees, and brake them, and drank their sweet  juices.
Then we lay down on our carpets, and waited for the dawn.
‘And at dawn we rose and knocked at the gate of the city.
It was wrought  out of red bronze, and carved with sea-dragons and dragons that have  wings.
The guards looked down from the battlements and asked us our  business.
The interpreter of the caravan answered that we had come from  the island of Syria with much merchandise.
They took hostages, and told  us that they would open the gate to us at noon, and bade us tarry till  then.
‘When it was noon they opened the gate, and as we entered in the people  came crowding out of the houses to look at us, and a crier went round the  city crying through a shell.
We stood in the market-place, and the  negroes uncorded the bales of figured cloths and opened the carved chests  of sycamore.
And when they had ended their task, the merchants set forth  their strange wares, the waxed linen from Egypt and the painted linen  from the country of the Ethiops, the purple sponges from Tyre and the  blue hangings from Sidon, the cups of cold amber and the fine vessels of  glass and the curious vessels of burnt clay.
From the roof of a house a  company of women watched us.
One of them wore a mask of gilded leather.
‘And on the first day the priests came and bartered with us, and on the  second day came the nobles, and on the third day came the craftsmen and  the slaves.
And this is their custom with all merchants as long as they  tarry in the city.
‘And we tarried for a moon, and when the moon was waning, I wearied and  wandered away through the streets of the city and came to the garden of  its god.
The priests in their yellow robes moved silently through the  green trees, and on a pavement of black marble stood the rose-red house  in which the god had his dwelling.
Its doors were of powdered lacquer,  and bulls and peacocks were wrought on them in raised and polished gold.
The tilted roof was of sea-green porcelain, and the jutting eaves were  festooned with little bells.
When the white doves flew past, they struck  the bells with their wings and made them tinkle.
‘In front of the temple was a pool of clear water paved with veined onyx.
I lay down beside it, and with my pale fingers I touched the broad  leaves.
One of the priests came towards me and stood behind me.
He had  sandals on his feet, one of soft serpent-skin and the other of birds’  plumage.
On his head was a mitre of black felt decorated with silver  crescents.
Seven yellows were woven into his robe, and his frizzed hair  was stained with antimony.
‘After a little while he spake to me, and asked me my desire.
‘I told him that my desire was to see the god.
‘“The god is hunting,” said the priest, looking strangely at me with his  small slanting eyes.
‘“Tell me in what forest, and I will ride with him,” I answered.
‘He combed out the soft fringes of his tunic with his long pointed nails.
“The god is asleep,” he murmured.
‘“Tell me on what couch, and I will watch by him,” I answered.
‘“The god is at the feast,” he cried.
‘“If the wine be sweet I will drink it with him, and if it be bitter I  will drink it with him also,” was my answer.
‘He bowed his head in wonder, and, taking me by the hand, he raised me  up, and led me into the temple.
‘And in the first chamber I saw an idol seated on a throne of jasper  bordered with great orient pearls.
It was carved out of ebony, and in  stature was of the stature of a man.
On its forehead was a ruby, and  thick oil dripped from its hair on to its thighs.
Its feet were red with  the blood of a newly-slain kid, and its loins girt with a copper belt  that was studded with seven beryls.
‘And I said to the priest, “Is this the god?”  And he answered me, “This  is the god.”    ‘“Show me the god,” I cried, “or I will surely slay thee.”  And I touched  his hand, and it became withered.
‘And the priest besought me, saying, “Let my lord heal his servant, and I  will show him the god.”    ‘So I breathed with my breath upon his hand, and it became whole again,  and he trembled and led me into the second chamber, and I saw an idol  standing on a lotus of jade hung with great emeralds.
It was carved out  of ivory, and in stature was twice the stature of a man.
On its forehead  was a chrysolite, and its breasts were smeared with myrrh and cinnamon.
In one hand it held a crooked sceptre of jade, and in the other a round  crystal.
It ware buskins of brass, and its thick neck was circled with a  circle of selenites.
‘And I said to the priest, “Is this the god?”    ‘And he answered me, “This is the god.”    ‘“Show me the god,” I cried, “or I will surely slay thee.”  And I touched  his eyes, and they became blind.
‘And the priest besought me, saying, “Let my lord heal his servant, and I  will show him the god.”    ‘So I breathed with my breath upon his eyes, and the sight came back to  them, and he trembled again, and led me into the third chamber, and lo!  there was no idol in it, nor image of any kind, but only a mirror of  round metal set on an altar of stone.
‘And I said to the priest, “Where is the god?”    ‘And he answered me: “There is no god but this mirror that thou seest,  for this is the Mirror of Wisdom.
And it reflecteth all things that are  in heaven and on earth, save only the face of him who looketh into it.
This it reflecteth not, so that he who looketh into it may be wise.
Many  other mirrors are there, but they are mirrors of Opinion.
This only is  the Mirror of Wisdom.
And they who possess this mirror know everything,  nor is there anything hidden from them.
And they who possess it not have  not Wisdom.
Therefore is it the god, and we worship it.”  And I looked  into the mirror, and it was even as he had said to me.
‘And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a valley  that is but a day’s journey from this place have I hidden the Mirror of  Wisdom.
Do but suffer me to enter into thee again and be thy servant,  and thou shalt be wiser than all the wise men, and Wisdom shall be thine.
Suffer me to enter into thee, and none will be as wise as thou.’    But the young Fisherman laughed.
‘Love is better than Wisdom,’ he cried,  ‘and the little Mermaid loves me.’    ‘Nay, but there is nothing better than Wisdom,’ said the Soul.
‘Love is better,’ answered the young Fisherman, and he plunged into the  deep, and the Soul went weeping away over the marshes.
And after the second year was over, the Soul came down to the shore of  the sea, and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep  and said, ‘Why dost thou call to me?’    And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I  have seen marvellous things.’    So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head  upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘When I left thee, I turned my face to the  South and journeyed.
From the South cometh everything that is precious.
Six days I journeyed along the highways that lead to the city of Ashter,  along the dusty red-dyed highways by which the pilgrims are wont to go  did I journey, and on the morning of the seventh day I lifted up my eyes,  and lo! the city lay at my feet, for it is in a valley.
‘There are nine gates to this city, and in front of each gate stands a  bronze horse that neighs when the Bedouins come down from the mountains.
The walls are cased with copper, and the watch-towers on the walls are  roofed with brass.
In every tower stands an archer with a bow in his  hand.
At sunrise he strikes with an arrow on a gong, and at sunset he  blows through a horn of horn.
‘When I sought to enter, the guards stopped me and asked of me who I was.
I made answer that I was a Dervish and on my way to the city of Mecca,  where there was a green veil on which the Koran was embroidered in silver  letters by the hands of the angels.
They were filled with wonder, and  entreated me to pass in.
‘Inside it is even as a bazaar.
Surely thou shouldst have been with me.
Across the narrow streets the gay lanterns of paper flutter like large  butterflies.
When the wind blows over the roofs they rise and fall as  painted bubbles do.
In front of their booths sit the merchants on silken  carpets.
They have straight black beards, and their turbans are covered  with golden sequins, and long strings of amber and carved peach-stones  glide through their cool fingers.
Some of them sell galbanum and nard,  and curious perfumes from the islands of the Indian Sea, and the thick  oil of red roses, and myrrh and little nail-shaped cloves.
When one  stops to speak to them, they throw pinches of frankincense upon a  charcoal brazier and make the air sweet.
I saw a Syrian who held in his  hands a thin rod like a reed.
Grey threads of smoke came from it, and  its odour as it burned was as the odour of the pink almond in spring.
Others sell silver bracelets embossed all over with creamy blue turquoise  stones, and anklets of brass wire fringed with little pearls, and tigers’  claws set in gold, and the claws of that gilt cat, the leopard, set in  gold also, and earrings of pierced emerald, and finger-rings of hollowed  jade.
From the tea-houses comes the sound of the guitar, and the  opium-smokers with their white smiling faces look out at the passers-by.
‘Of a truth thou shouldst have been with me.
The wine-sellers elbow  their way through the crowd with great black skins on their shoulders.
Most of them sell the wine of Schiraz, which is as sweet as honey.
They  serve it in little metal cups and strew rose leaves upon it.
In the  market-place stand the fruitsellers, who sell all kinds of fruit: ripe  figs, with their bruised purple flesh, melons, smelling of musk and  yellow as topazes, citrons and rose-apples and clusters of white grapes,  round red-gold oranges, and oval lemons of green gold.
Once I saw an  elephant go by.
Its trunk was painted with vermilion and turmeric, and  over its ears it had a net of crimson silk cord.
It stopped opposite one  of the booths and began eating the oranges, and the man only laughed.
Thou canst not think how strange a people they are.
When they are glad  they go to the bird-sellers and buy of them a caged bird, and set it free  that their joy may be greater, and when they are sad they scourge  themselves with thorns that their sorrow may not grow less.
‘One evening I met some negroes carrying a heavy palanquin through the  bazaar.
It was made of gilded bamboo, and the poles were of vermilion  lacquer studded with brass peacocks.
Across the windows hung thin  curtains of muslin embroidered with beetles’ wings and with tiny  seed-pearls, and as it passed by a pale-faced Circassian looked out and  smiled at me.
I followed behind, and the negroes hurried their steps and  scowled.
But I did not care.
I felt a great curiosity come over me.
‘At last they stopped at a square white house.
There were no windows to  it, only a little door like the door of a tomb.
They set down the  palanquin and knocked three times with a copper hammer.
An Armenian in a  caftan of green leather peered through the wicket, and when he saw them  he opened, and spread a carpet on the ground, and the woman stepped out.
As she went in, she turned round and smiled at me again.
I had never  seen any one so pale.
‘When the moon rose I returned to the same place and sought for the  house, but it was no longer there.
When I saw that, I knew who the woman  was, and wherefore she had smiled at me.
‘Certainly thou shouldst have been with me.
On the feast of the New Moon  the young Emperor came forth from his palace and went into the mosque to  pray.
His hair and beard were dyed with rose-leaves, and his cheeks were  powdered with a fine gold dust.
The palms of his feet and hands were  yellow with saffron.
‘At sunrise he went forth from his palace in a robe of silver, and at  sunset he returned to it again in a robe of gold.
The people flung  themselves on the ground and hid their faces, but I would not do so.
I  stood by the stall of a seller of dates and waited.
When the Emperor saw  me, he raised his painted eyebrows and stopped.
I stood quite still, and  made him no obeisance.
The people marvelled at my boldness, and  counselled me to flee from the city.
I paid no heed to them, but went  and sat with the sellers of strange gods, who by reason of their craft  are abominated.
When I told them what I had done, each of them gave me a  god and prayed me to leave them.
‘That night, as I lay on a cushion in the tea-house that is in the Street  of Pomegranates, the guards of the Emperor entered and led me to the  palace.
As I went in they closed each door behind me, and put a chain  across it.
Inside was a great court with an arcade running all round.
The walls were of white alabaster, set here and there with blue and green  tiles.
The pillars were of green marble, and the pavement of a kind of  peach-blossom marble.
I had never seen anything like it before.
‘As I passed across the court two veiled women looked down from a balcony  and cursed me.
The guards hastened on, and the butts of the lances rang  upon the polished floor.
They opened a gate of wrought ivory, and I  found myself in a watered garden of seven terraces.
It was planted with  tulip-cups and moonflowers, and silver-studded aloes.
Like a slim reed  of crystal a fountain hung in the dusky air.
The cypress-trees were like  burnt-out torches.
From one of them a nightingale was singing.
‘At the end of the garden stood a little pavilion.
As we approached it  two eunuchs came out to meet us.
Their fat bodies swayed as they walked,  and they glanced curiously at me with their yellow-lidded eyes.
One of  them drew aside the captain of the guard, and in a low voice whispered to  him.
The other kept munching scented pastilles, which he took with an  affected gesture out of an oval box of lilac enamel.
‘After a few moments the captain of the guard dismissed the soldiers.
They went back to the palace, the eunuchs following slowly behind and  plucking the sweet mulberries from the trees as they passed.
Once the  elder of the two turned round, and smiled at me with an evil smile.
‘Then the captain of the guard motioned me towards the entrance of the  pavilion.
I walked on without trembling, and drawing the heavy curtain  aside I entered in.
‘The young Emperor was stretched on a couch of dyed lion skins, and a  gerfalcon perched upon his wrist.
Behind him stood a brass-turbaned  Nubian, naked down to the waist, and with heavy earrings in his split  ears.
On a table by the side of the couch lay a mighty scimitar of  steel.
‘When the Emperor saw me he frowned, and said to me, “What is thy name?
Knowest thou not that I am Emperor of this city?”  But I made him no  answer.
‘He pointed with his finger at the scimitar, and the Nubian seized it,  and rushing forward struck at me with great violence.
The blade whizzed  through me, and did me no hurt.
The man fell sprawling on the floor, and  when he rose up his teeth chattered with terror and he hid himself behind  the couch.
‘The Emperor leapt to his feet, and taking a lance from a stand of arms,  he threw it at me.
I caught it in its flight, and brake the shaft into  two pieces.
He shot at me with an arrow, but I held up my hands and it  stopped in mid-air.
Then he drew a dagger from a belt of white leather,  and stabbed the Nubian in the throat lest the slave should tell of his  dishonour.
The man writhed like a trampled snake, and a red foam bubbled  from his lips.
‘As soon as he was dead the Emperor turned to me, and when he had wiped  away the bright sweat from his brow with a little napkin of purfled and  purple silk, he said to me, “Art thou a prophet, that I may not harm  thee, or the son of a prophet, that I can do thee no hurt?
I pray thee  leave my city to-night, for while thou art in it I am no longer its  lord.”    ‘And I answered him, “I will go for half of thy treasure.
Give me half  of thy treasure, and I will go away.”    ‘He took me by the hand, and led me out into the garden.
When the  captain of the guard saw me, he wondered.
When the eunuchs saw me, their  knees shook and they fell upon the ground in fear.
‘There is a chamber in the palace that has eight walls of red porphyry,  and a brass-sealed ceiling hung with lamps.
The Emperor touched one of  the walls and it opened, and we passed down a corridor that was lit with  many torches.
In niches upon each side stood great wine-jars filled to  the brim with silver pieces.
When we reached the centre of the corridor  the Emperor spake the word that may not be spoken, and a granite door  swung back on a secret spring, and he put his hands before his face lest  his eyes should be dazzled.
‘Thou couldst not believe how marvellous a place it was.
There were huge  tortoise-shells full of pearls, and hollowed moonstones of great size  piled up with red rubies.
The gold was stored in coffers of  elephant-hide, and the gold-dust in leather bottles.
There were opals  and sapphires, the former in cups of crystal, and the latter in cups of  jade.
Round green emeralds were ranged in order upon thin plates of  ivory, and in one corner were silk bags filled, some with  turquoise-stones, and others with beryls.
The ivory horns were heaped  with purple amethysts, and the horns of brass with chalcedonies and  sards.
The pillars, which were of cedar, were hung with strings of  yellow lynx-stones.
In the flat oval shields there were carbuncles, both  wine-coloured and coloured like grass.
And yet I have told thee but a  tithe of what was there.
‘And when the Emperor had taken away his hands from before his face he  said to me: “This is my house of treasure, and half that is in it is  thine, even as I promised to thee.
And I will give thee camels and camel  drivers, and they shall do thy bidding and take thy share of the treasure  to whatever part of the world thou desirest to go.
And the thing shall  be done to-night, for I would not that the Sun, who is my father, should  see that there is in my city a man whom I cannot slay.”    ‘But I answered him, “The gold that is here is thine, and the silver also  is thine, and thine are the precious jewels and the things of price.
As  for me, I have no need of these.
Nor shall I take aught from thee but  that little ring that thou wearest on the finger of thy hand.”    ‘And the Emperor frowned.
“It is but a ring of lead,” he cried, “nor has  it any value.
Therefore take thy half of the treasure and go from my  city.”    ‘“Nay,” I answered, “but I will take nought but that leaden ring, for I  know what is written within it, and for what purpose.”    ‘And the Emperor trembled, and besought me and said, “Take all the  treasure and go from my city.
The half that is mine shall be thine  also.”    ‘And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a cave  that is but a day’s journey from this place have, I hidden the Ring of  Riches.
It is but a day’s journey from this place, and it waits for thy  coming.
He who has this Ring is richer than all the kings of the world.
Come therefore and take it, and the world’s riches shall be thine.’    But the young Fisherman laughed.
‘Love is better than Riches,’ he cried,  ‘and the little Mermaid loves me.’    ‘Nay, but there is nothing better than Riches,’ said the Soul.
‘Love is better,’ answered the young Fisherman, and he plunged into the  deep, and the Soul went weeping away over the marshes.
And after the third year was over, the Soul came down to the shore of the  sea, and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep and  said, ‘Why dost thou call to me?’    And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I  have seen marvellous things.’    So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head  upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘In a city that I know of there is an inn that  standeth by a river.
I sat there with sailors who drank of two  different-coloured wines, and ate bread made of barley, and little salt  fish served in bay leaves with vinegar.
And as we sat and made merry,  there entered to us an old man bearing a leathern carpet and a lute that  had two horns of amber.
And when he had laid out the carpet on the  floor, he struck with a quill on the wire strings of his lute, and a girl  whose face was veiled ran in and began to dance before us.
Her face was  veiled with a veil of gauze, but her feet were naked.
Naked were her  feet, and they moved over the carpet like little white pigeons.
Never  have I seen anything so marvellous; and the city in which she dances is  but a day’s journey from this place.’    Now when the young Fisherman heard the words of his Soul, he remembered  that the little Mermaid had no feet and could not dance.
And a great  desire came over him, and he said to himself, ‘It is but a day’s journey,  and I can return to my love,’ and he laughed, and stood up in the shallow  water, and strode towards the shore.
And when he had reached the dry shore he laughed again, and held out his  arms to his Soul.
And his Soul gave a great cry of joy and ran to meet  him, and entered into him, and the young Fisherman saw stretched before  him upon the sand that shadow of the body that is the body of the Soul.
And his Soul said to him, ‘Let us not tarry, but get hence at once, for  the Sea-gods are jealous, and have monsters that do their bidding.’                                            So they made haste, and all that night they journeyed beneath the moon,  and all the next day they journeyed beneath the sun, and on the evening  of the day they came to a city.
And the young Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she  dances of whom thou didst speak to me?’    And his Soul answered him, ‘It is not this city, but another.
Nevertheless let us enter in.’  So they entered in and passed through the  streets, and as they passed through the Street of the Jewellers the young  Fisherman saw a fair silver cup set forth in a booth.
And his Soul said  to him, ‘Take that silver cup and hide it.’    So he took the cup and hid it in the fold of his tunic, and they went  hurriedly out of the city.
And after that they had gone a league from the city, the young Fisherman  frowned, and flung the cup away, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou  tell me to take this cup and hide it, for it was an evil thing to do?’    But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’    And on the evening of the second day they came to a city, and the young  Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she dances of whom  thou didst speak to me?’    And his Soul answered him, ‘It is not this city, but another.
Nevertheless let us enter in.’  So they entered in and passed through the  streets, and as they passed through the Street of the Sellers of Sandals,  the young Fisherman saw a child standing by a jar of water.
And his Soul  said to him, ‘Smite that child.’  So he smote the child till it wept, and  when he had done this they went hurriedly out of the city.
And after that they had gone a league from the city the young Fisherman  grew wroth, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou tell me to smite the  child, for it was an evil thing to do?’    But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’    And on the evening of the third day they came to a city, and the young  Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she dances of whom  thou didst speak to me?’    And his Soul answered him, ‘It may be that it is in this city, therefore  let us enter in.’    So they entered in and passed through the streets, but nowhere could the  young Fisherman find the river or the inn that stood by its side.
And  the people of the city looked curiously at him, and he grew afraid and  said to his Soul, ‘Let us go hence, for she who dances with white feet is  not here.’    But his Soul answered, ‘Nay, but let us tarry, for the night is dark and  there will be robbers on the way.’    So he sat him down in the market-place and rested, and after a time there  went by a hooded merchant who had a cloak of cloth of Tartary, and bare a  lantern of pierced horn at the end of a jointed reed.
And the merchant  said to him, ‘Why dost thou sit in the market-place, seeing that the  booths are closed and the bales corded?’    And the young Fisherman answered him, ‘I can find no inn in this city,  nor have I any kinsman who might give me shelter.’    ‘Are we not all kinsmen?’ said the merchant.
‘And did not one God make  us?
Therefore come with me, for I have a guest-chamber.’    So the young Fisherman rose up and followed the merchant to his house.
And when he had passed through a garden of pomegranates and entered into  the house, the merchant brought him rose-water in a copper dish that he  might wash his hands, and ripe melons that he might quench his thirst,  and set a bowl of rice and a piece of roasted kid before him.
And after that he had finished, the merchant led him to the  guest-chamber, and bade him sleep and be at rest.
And the young  Fisherman gave him thanks, and kissed the ring that was on his hand, and  flung himself down on the carpets of dyed goat’s-hair.
And when he had  covered himself with a covering of black lamb’s-wool he fell asleep.
And three hours before dawn, and while it was still night, his Soul waked  him and said to him, ‘Rise up and go to the room of the merchant, even to  the room in which he sleepeth, and slay him, and take from him his gold,  for we have need of it.’    And the young Fisherman rose up and crept towards the room of the  merchant, and over the feet of the merchant there was lying a curved  sword, and the tray by the side of the merchant held nine purses of gold.
And he reached out his hand and touched the sword, and when he touched it  the merchant started and awoke, and leaping up seized himself the sword  and cried to the young Fisherman, ‘Dost thou return evil for good, and  pay with the shedding of blood for the kindness that I have shown thee?’    And his Soul said to the young Fisherman, ‘Strike him,’ and he struck him  so that he swooned and he seized then the nine purses of gold, and fled  hastily through the garden of pomegranates, and set his face to the star  that is the star of morning.
And when they had gone a league from the city, the young Fisherman beat  his breast, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou bid me slay the  merchant and take his gold?
Surely thou art evil.’    But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’    ‘Nay,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘I may not be at peace, for all that  thou hast made me to do I hate.
Thee also I hate, and I bid thee tell me  wherefore thou hast wrought with me in this wise.’    And his Soul answered him, ‘When thou didst send me forth into the world  thou gavest me no heart, so I learned to do all these things and love  them.’    ‘What sayest thou?’ murmured the young Fisherman.
‘Thou knowest,’ answered his Soul, ‘thou knowest it well.
Hast thou  forgotten that thou gavest me no heart?
I trow not.
And so trouble not  thyself nor me, but be at peace, for there is no pain that thou shalt not  give away, nor any pleasure that thou shalt not receive.’    And when the young Fisherman heard these words he trembled and said to  his Soul, ‘Nay, but thou art evil, and hast made me forget my love, and  hast tempted me with temptations, and hast set my feet in the ways of  sin.’    And his Soul answered him, ‘Thou hast not forgotten that when thou didst  send me forth into the world thou gavest me no heart.
Come, let us go to  another city, and make merry, for we have nine purses of gold.’    But the young Fisherman took the nine purses of gold, and flung them  down, and trampled on them.
‘Nay,’ he cried, ‘but I will have nought to do with thee, nor will I  journey with thee anywhere, but even as I sent thee away before, so will  I send thee away now, for thou hast wrought me no good.’  And he turned  his back to the moon, and with the little knife that had the handle of  green viper’s skin he strove to cut from his feet that shadow of the body  which is the body of the Soul.
Yet his Soul stirred not from him, nor paid heed to his command, but said  to him, ‘The spell that the Witch told thee avails thee no more, for I  may not leave thee, nor mayest thou drive me forth.
Once in his life may  a man send his Soul away, but he who receiveth back his Soul must keep it  with him for ever, and this is his punishment and his reward.’    And the young Fisherman grew pale and clenched his hands and cried, ‘She  was a false Witch in that she told me not that.’    ‘Nay,’ answered his Soul, ‘but she was true to Him she worships, and  whose servant she will be ever.’    And when the young Fisherman knew that he could no longer get rid of his  Soul, and that it was an evil Soul and would abide with him always, he  fell upon the ground weeping bitterly.
And when it was day the young Fisherman rose up and said to his Soul, ‘I  will bind my hands that I may not do thy bidding, and close my lips that  I may not speak thy words, and I will return to the place where she whom  I love has her dwelling.
Even to the sea will I return, and to the  little bay where she is wont to sing, and I will call to her and tell her  the evil I have done and the evil thou hast wrought on me.’    And his Soul tempted him and said, ‘Who is thy love, that thou shouldst  return to her?
The world has many fairer than she is.
There are the  dancing-girls of Samaris who dance in the manner of all kinds of birds  and beasts.
Their feet are painted with henna, and in their hands they  have little copper bells.
They laugh while they dance, and their  laughter is as clear as the laughter of water.
Come with me and I will  show them to thee.
For what is this trouble of thine about the things of  sin?
Is that which is pleasant to eat not made for the eater?
Is there  poison in that which is sweet to drink?
Trouble not thyself, but come  with me to another city.
There is a little city hard by in which there  is a garden of tulip-trees.
And there dwell in this comely garden white  peacocks and peacocks that have blue breasts.
Their tails when they  spread them to the sun are like disks of ivory and like gilt disks.
And  she who feeds them dances for their pleasure, and sometimes she dances on  her hands and at other times she dances with her feet.
Her eyes are  coloured with stibium, and her nostrils are shaped like the wings of a  swallow.
From a hook in one of her nostrils hangs a flower that is  carved out of a pearl.
She laughs while she dances, and the silver rings  that are about her ankles tinkle like bells of silver.
And so trouble  not thyself any more, but come with me to this city.’    But the young Fisherman answered not his Soul, but closed his lips with  the seal of silence and with a tight cord bound his hands, and journeyed  back to the place from which he had come, even to the little bay where  his love had been wont to sing.
And ever did his Soul tempt him by the  way, but he made it no answer, nor would he do any of the wickedness that  it sought to make him to do, so great was the power of the love that was  within him.
And when he had reached the shore of the sea, he loosed the cord from his  hands, and took the seal of silence from his lips, and called to the  little Mermaid.
But she came not to his call, though he called to her  all day long and besought her.
And his Soul mocked him and said, ‘Surely thou hast but little joy out of  thy love.
Thou art as one who in time of death pours water into a broken  vessel.
Thou givest away what thou hast, and nought is given to thee in  return.
It were better for thee to come with me, for I know where the  Valley of Pleasure lies, and what things are wrought there.’    But the young Fisherman answered not his Soul, but in a cleft of the rock  he built himself a house of wattles, and abode there for the space of a  year.
And every morning he called to the Mermaid, and every noon he  called to her again, and at night-time he spake her name.
Yet never did  she rise out of the sea to meet him, nor in any place of the sea could he  find her though he sought for her in the caves and in the green water, in  the pools of the tide and in the wells that are at the bottom of the  deep.
And ever did his Soul tempt him with evil, and whisper of terrible  things.
Yet did it not prevail against him, so great was the power of  his love.
And after the year was over, the Soul thought within himself, ‘I have  tempted my master with evil, and his love is stronger than I am.
I will  tempt him now with good, and it may be that he will come with me.’    So he spake to the young Fisherman and said, ‘I have told thee of the joy  of the world, and thou hast turned a deaf ear to me.
Suffer me now to  tell thee of the world’s pain, and it may be that thou wilt hearken.
For  of a truth pain is the Lord of this world, nor is there any one who  escapes from its net.
There be some who lack raiment, and others who  lack bread.
There be widows who sit in purple, and widows who sit in  rags.
To and fro over the fens go the lepers, and they are cruel to each  other.
The beggars go up and down on the highways, and their wallets are  empty.
Through the streets of the cities walks Famine, and the Plague  sits at their gates.
Come, let us go forth and mend these things, and  make them not to be.
Wherefore shouldst thou tarry here calling to thy  love, seeing she comes not to thy call?
And what is love, that thou  shouldst set this high store upon it?’    But the young Fisherman answered it nought, so great was the power of his  love.
And every morning he called to the Mermaid, and every noon he  called to her again, and at night-time he spake her name.
Yet never did  she rise out of the sea to meet him, nor in any place of the sea could he  find her, though he sought for her in the rivers of the sea, and in the  valleys that are under the waves, in the sea that the night makes purple,  and in the sea that the dawn leaves grey.
And after the second year was over, the Soul said to the young Fisherman  at night-time, and as he sat in the wattled house alone, ‘Lo! now I have  tempted thee with evil, and I have tempted thee with good, and thy love  is stronger than I am.
Wherefore will I tempt thee no longer, but I pray  thee to suffer me to enter thy heart, that I may be one with thee even as  before.’    ‘Surely thou mayest enter,’ said the young Fisherman, ‘for in the days  when with no heart thou didst go through the world thou must have much  suffered.’    ‘Alas!’ cried his Soul, ‘I can find no place of entrance, so compassed  about with love is this heart of thine.’    ‘Yet I would that I could help thee,’ said the young Fisherman.
And as he spake there came a great cry of mourning from the sea, even the  cry that men hear when one of the Sea-folk is dead.
And the young  Fisherman leapt up, and left his wattled house, and ran down to the  shore.
And the black waves came hurrying to the shore, bearing with them  a burden that was whiter than silver.
White as the surf it was, and like  a flower it tossed on the waves.
And the surf took it from the waves,  and the foam took it from the surf, and the shore received it, and lying  at his feet the young Fisherman saw the body of the little Mermaid.
Dead  at his feet it was lying.
Weeping as one smitten with pain he flung himself down beside it, and he  kissed the cold red of the mouth, and toyed with the wet amber of the  hair.
He flung himself down beside it on the sand, weeping as one  trembling with joy, and in his brown arms he held it to his breast.
Cold  were the lips, yet he kissed them.
Salt was the honey of the hair, yet  he tasted it with a bitter joy.
He kissed the closed eyelids, and the  wild spray that lay upon their cups was less salt than his tears.
And to the dead thing he made confession.
Into the shells of its ears he  poured the harsh wine of his tale.
He put the little hands round his  neck, and with his fingers he touched the thin reed of the throat.
Bitter, bitter was his joy, and full of strange gladness was his pain.
The black sea came nearer, and the white foam moaned like a leper.
With  white claws of foam the sea grabbled at the shore.
From the palace of  the Sea-King came the cry of mourning again, and far out upon the sea the  great Tritons blew hoarsely upon their horns.
‘Flee away,’ said his Soul, ‘for ever doth the sea come nigher, and if  thou tarriest it will slay thee.
Flee away, for I am afraid, seeing that  thy heart is closed against me by reason of the greatness of thy love.
Flee away to a place of safety.
Surely thou wilt not send me without a  heart into another world?’    But the young Fisherman listened not to his Soul, but called on the  little Mermaid and said, ‘Love is better than wisdom, and more precious  than riches, and fairer than the feet of the daughters of men.
The fires  cannot destroy it, nor can the waters quench it.
I called on thee at  dawn, and thou didst not come to my call.
The moon heard thy name, yet  hadst thou no heed of me.
For evilly had I left thee, and to my own hurt  had I wandered away.
Yet ever did thy love abide with me, and ever was  it strong, nor did aught prevail against it, though I have looked upon  evil and looked upon good.
And now that thou art dead, surely I will die  with thee also.’    And his Soul besought him to depart, but he would not, so great was his  love.
And the sea came nearer, and sought to cover him with its waves,  and when he knew that the end was at hand he kissed with mad lips the  cold lips of the Mermaid, and the heart that was within him brake.
And  as through the fulness of his love his heart did break, the Soul found an  entrance and entered in, and was one with him even as before.
And the  sea covered the young Fisherman with its waves.
And in the morning the Priest went forth to bless the sea, for it had  been troubled.
And with him went the monks and the musicians, and the  candle-bearers, and the swingers of censers, and a great company.
And when the Priest reached the shore he saw the young Fisherman lying  drowned in the surf, and clasped in his arms was the body of the little  Mermaid.
And he drew back frowning, and having made the sign of the  cross, he cried aloud and said, ‘I will not bless the sea nor anything  that is in it.
Accursed be the Sea-folk, and accursed be all they who  traffic with them.
And as for him who for love’s sake forsook God, and  so lieth here with his leman slain by God’s judgment, take up his body  and the body of his leman, and bury them in the corner of the Field of  the Fullers, and set no mark above them, nor sign of any kind, that none  may know the place of their resting.
For accursed were they in their  lives, and accursed shall they be in their deaths also.’    And the people did as he commanded them, and in the corner of the Field  of the Fullers, where no sweet herbs grew, they dug a deep pit, and laid  the dead things within it.
And when the third year was over, and on a day that was a holy day, the  Priest went up to the chapel, that he might show to the people the wounds  of the Lord, and speak to them about the wrath of God.
And when he had robed himself with his robes, and entered in and bowed  himself before the altar, he saw that the altar was covered with strange  flowers that never had been seen before.
Strange were they to look at,  and of curious beauty, and their beauty troubled him, and their odour was  sweet in his nostrils.
And he felt glad, and understood not why he was  glad.
And after that he had opened the tabernacle, and incensed the monstrance  that was in it, and shown the fair wafer to the people, and hid it again  behind the veil of veils, he began to speak to the people, desiring to  speak to them of the wrath of God.
But the beauty of the white flowers  troubled him, and their odour was sweet in his nostrils, and there came  another word into his lips, and he spake not of the wrath of God, but of  the God whose name is Love.
And why he so spake, he knew not.
And when he had finished his word the people wept, and the Priest went  back to the sacristy, and his eyes were full of tears.
And the deacons  came in and began to unrobe him, and took from him the alb and the  girdle, the maniple and the stole.
And he stood as one in a dream.
And after that they had unrobed him, he looked at them and said, ‘What  are the flowers that stand on the altar, and whence do they come?’    And they answered him, ‘What flowers they are we cannot tell, but they  come from the corner of the Fullers’ Field.’  And the Priest trembled,  and returned to his own house and prayed.
And in the morning, while it was still dawn, he went forth with the monks  and the musicians, and the candle-bearers and the swingers of censers,  and a great company, and came to the shore of the sea, and blessed the  sea, and all the wild things that are in it.
The Fauns also he blessed,  and the little things that dance in the woodland, and the bright-eyed  things that peer through the leaves.
All the things in God’s world he  blessed, and the people were filled with joy and wonder.
Yet never again  in the corner of the Fullers’ Field grew flowers of any kind, but the  field remained barren even as before.
Nor came the Sea-folk into the bay  as they had been wont to do, for they went to another part of the sea.
Once upon a time two poor Woodcutters were making their way home through  a great pine-forest.
It was winter, and a night of bitter cold.
The  snow lay thick upon the ground, and upon the branches of the trees: the  frost kept snapping the little twigs on either side of them, as they  passed: and when they came to the Mountain-Torrent she was hanging  motionless in air, for the Ice-King had kissed her.
So cold was it that even the animals and the birds did not know what to  make of it.
‘Ugh!’ snarled the Wolf, as he limped through the brushwood with his tail  between his legs, ‘this is perfectly monstrous weather.
Why doesn’t the  Government look to it?’    ‘Weet! weet! weet!’ twittered the green Linnets, ‘the old Earth is dead  and they have laid her out in her white shroud.’    ‘The Earth is going to be married, and this is her bridal dress,’  whispered the Turtle-doves to each other.
Their little pink feet were  quite frost-bitten, but they felt that it was their duty to take a  romantic view of the situation.
‘Nonsense!’ growled the Wolf.
‘I tell you that it is all the fault of  the Government, and if you don’t believe me I shall eat you.’  The Wolf  had a thoroughly practical mind, and was never at a loss for a good  argument.
‘Well, for my own part,’ said the Woodpecker, who was a born philosopher,  ‘I don’t care an atomic theory for explanations.
If a thing is so, it is  so, and at present it is terribly cold.’    Terribly cold it certainly was.
The little Squirrels, who lived inside  the tall fir-tree, kept rubbing each other’s noses to keep themselves  warm, and the Rabbits curled themselves up in their holes, and did not  venture even to look out of doors.
The only people who seemed to enjoy  it were the great horned Owls.
Their feathers were quite stiff with  rime, but they did not mind, and they rolled their large yellow eyes, and  called out to each other across the forest, ‘Tu-whit!  Tu-whoo!  Tu-whit!  Tu-whoo! what delightful weather we are having!’    On and on went the two Woodcutters, blowing lustily upon their fingers,  and stamping with their huge iron-shod boots upon the caked snow.
Once  they sank into a deep drift, and came out as white as millers are, when  the stones are grinding; and once they slipped on the hard smooth ice  where the marsh-water was frozen, and their faggots fell out of their  bundles, and they had to pick them up and bind them together again; and  once they thought that they had lost their way, and a great terror seized  on them, for they knew that the Snow is cruel to those who sleep in her  arms.
But they put their trust in the good Saint Martin, who watches  over all travellers, and retraced their steps, and went warily, and at  last they reached the outskirts of the forest, and saw, far down in the  valley beneath them, the lights of the village in which they dwelt.
So overjoyed were they at their deliverance that they laughed aloud, and  the Earth seemed to them like a flower of silver, and the Moon like a  flower of gold.
Yet, after that they had laughed they became sad, for they remembered  their poverty, and one of them said to the other, ‘Why did we make merry,  seeing that life is for the rich, and not for such as we are?
Better  that we had died of cold in the forest, or that some wild beast had  fallen upon us and slain us.’    ‘Truly,’ answered his companion, ‘much is given to some, and little is  given to others.
Injustice has parcelled out the world, nor is there  equal division of aught save of sorrow.’    But as they were bewailing their misery to each other this strange thing  happened.
There fell from heaven a very bright and beautiful star.
It  slipped down the side of the sky, passing by the other stars in its  course, and, as they watched it wondering, it seemed to them to sink  behind a clump of willow-trees that stood hard by a little sheepfold no  more than a stone’s-throw away.
‘Why! there is a crook of gold for whoever finds it,’ they cried, and  they set to and ran, so eager were they for the gold.
And one of them ran faster than his mate, and outstripped him, and forced  his way through the willows, and came out on the other side, and lo!  there was indeed a thing of gold lying on the white snow.
So he hastened  towards it, and stooping down placed his hands upon it, and it was a  cloak of golden tissue, curiously wrought with stars, and wrapped in many  folds.
And he cried out to his comrade that he had found the treasure  that had fallen from the sky, and when his comrade had come up, they sat  them down in the snow, and loosened the folds of the cloak that they  might divide the pieces of gold.
But, alas! no gold was in it, nor  silver, nor, indeed, treasure of any kind, but only a little child who  was asleep.
And one of them said to the other: ‘This is a bitter ending to our hope,  nor have we any good fortune, for what doth a child profit to a man?
Let  us leave it here, and go our way, seeing that we are poor men, and have  children of our own whose bread we may not give to another.’    But his companion answered him: ‘Nay, but it were an evil thing to leave  the child to perish here in the snow, and though I am as poor as thou  art, and have many mouths to feed, and but little in the pot, yet will I  bring it home with me, and my wife shall have care of it.’    So very tenderly he took up the child, and wrapped the cloak around it to  shield it from the harsh cold, and made his way down the hill to the  village, his comrade marvelling much at his foolishness and softness of  heart.
And when they came to the village, his comrade said to him, ‘Thou hast  the child, therefore give me the cloak, for it is meet that we should  share.’    But he answered him: ‘Nay, for the cloak is neither mine nor thine, but  the child’s only,’ and he bade him Godspeed, and went to his own house  and knocked.
And when his wife opened the door and saw that her husband had returned  safe to her, she put her arms round his neck and kissed him, and took  from his back the bundle of faggots, and brushed the snow off his boots,  and bade him come in.
But he said to her, ‘I have found something in the forest, and I have  brought it to thee to have care of it,’ and he stirred not from the  threshold.
‘What is it?’ she cried.
‘Show it to me, for the house is bare, and we  have need of many things.’  And he drew the cloak back, and showed her  the sleeping child.
‘Alack, goodman!’ she murmured, ‘have we not children of our own, that  thou must needs bring a changeling to sit by the hearth?
And who knows  if it will not bring us bad fortune?
And how shall we tend it?’  And she  was wroth against him.
‘Nay, but it is a Star-Child,’ he answered; and he told her the strange  manner of the finding of it.
But she would not be appeased, but mocked at him, and spoke angrily, and  cried: ‘Our children lack bread, and shall we feed the child of another?
Who is there who careth for us?
And who giveth us food?’    ‘Nay, but God careth for the sparrows even, and feedeth them,’ he  answered.
‘Do not the sparrows die of hunger in the winter?’ she asked.
‘And is it  not winter now?’    And the man answered nothing, but stirred not from the threshold.
And a bitter wind from the forest came in through the open door, and made  her tremble, and she shivered, and said to him: ‘Wilt thou not close the  door?
There cometh a bitter wind into the house, and I am cold.’    ‘Into a house where a heart is hard cometh there not always a bitter  wind?’ he asked.
And the woman answered him nothing, but crept closer to  the fire.
And after a time she turned round and looked at him, and her eyes were  full of tears.
And he came in swiftly, and placed the child in her arms,  and she kissed it, and laid it in a little bed where the youngest of  their own children was lying.
And on the morrow the Woodcutter took the  curious cloak of gold and placed it in a great chest, and a chain of  amber that was round the child’s neck his wife took and set it in the  chest also.
So the Star-Child was brought up with the children of the Woodcutter, and  sat at the same board with them, and was their playmate.
And every year  he became more beautiful to look at, so that all those who dwelt in the  village were filled with wonder, for, while they were swarthy and  black-haired, he was white and delicate as sawn ivory, and his curls were  like the rings of the daffodil.
His lips, also, were like the petals of  a red flower, and his eyes were like violets by a river of pure water,  and his body like the narcissus of a field where the mower comes not.
Yet did his beauty work him evil.
For he grew proud, and cruel, and  selfish.
The children of the Woodcutter, and the other children of the  village, he despised, saying that they were of mean parentage, while he  was noble, being sprang from a Star, and he made himself master over  them, and called them his servants.
No pity had he for the poor, or for  those who were blind or maimed or in any way afflicted, but would cast  stones at them and drive them forth on to the highway, and bid them beg  their bread elsewhere, so that none save the outlaws came twice to that  village to ask for alms.
Indeed, he was as one enamoured of beauty, and  would mock at the weakly and ill-favoured, and make jest of them; and  himself he loved, and in summer, when the winds were still, he would lie  by the well in the priest’s orchard and look down at the marvel of his  own face, and laugh for the pleasure he had in his fairness.
Often did the Woodcutter and his wife chide him, and say: ‘We did not  deal with thee as thou dealest with those who are left desolate, and have  none to succour them.
Wherefore art thou so cruel to all who need pity?’    Often did the old priest send for him, and seek to teach him the love of  living things, saying to him: ‘The fly is thy brother.
Do it no harm.
The wild birds that roam through the forest have their freedom.
Snare  them not for thy pleasure.
God made the blind-worm and the mole, and  each has its place.
Who art thou to bring pain into God’s world?
Even  the cattle of the field praise Him.’    But the Star-Child heeded not their words, but would frown and flout, and  go back to his companions, and lead them.
And his companions followed  him, for he was fair, and fleet of foot, and could dance, and pipe, and  make music.
And wherever the Star-Child led them they followed, and  whatever the Star-Child bade them do, that did they.
And when he pierced  with a sharp reed the dim eyes of the mole, they laughed, and when he  cast stones at the leper they laughed also.
And in all things he ruled  them, and they became hard of heart even as he was.
Now there passed one day through the village a poor beggar-woman.
Her  garments were torn and ragged, and her feet were bleeding from the rough  road on which she had travelled, and she was in very evil plight.
And  being weary she sat her down under a chestnut-tree to rest.
But when the Star-Child saw her, he said to his companions, ‘See!  There  sitteth a foul beggar-woman under that fair and green-leaved tree.
Come,  let us drive her hence, for she is ugly and ill-favoured.’    So he came near and threw stones at her, and mocked her, and she looked  at him with terror in her eyes, nor did she move her gaze from him.
And  when the Woodcutter, who was cleaving logs in a haggard hard by, saw what  the Star-Child was doing, he ran up and rebuked him, and said to him:  ‘Surely thou art hard of heart and knowest not mercy, for what evil has  this poor woman done to thee that thou shouldst treat her in this wise?’    And the Star-Child grew red with anger, and stamped his foot upon the  ground, and said, ‘Who art thou to question me what I do?
I am no son of  thine to do thy bidding.’    ‘Thou speakest truly,’ answered the Woodcutter, ‘yet did I show thee pity  when I found thee in the forest.’    And when the woman heard these words she gave a loud cry, and fell into a  swoon.
And the Woodcutter carried her to his own house, and his wife had  care of her, and when she rose up from the swoon into which she had  fallen, they set meat and drink before her, and bade her have comfort.
But she would neither eat nor drink, but said to the Woodcutter, ‘Didst  thou not say that the child was found in the forest?
And was it not ten  years from this day?’    And the Woodcutter answered, ‘Yea, it was in the forest that I found him,  and it is ten years from this day.’    ‘And what signs didst thou find with him?’ she cried.
‘Bare he not upon  his neck a chain of amber?
Was not round him a cloak of gold tissue  broidered with stars?’    ‘Truly,’ answered the Woodcutter, ‘it was even as thou sayest.’  And he  took the cloak and the amber chain from the chest where they lay, and  showed them to her.
And when she saw them she wept for joy, and said, ‘He is my little son  whom I lost in the forest.
I pray thee send for him quickly, for in  search of him have I wandered over the whole world.’    So the Woodcutter and his wife went out and called to the Star-Child, and  said to him, ‘Go into the house, and there shalt thou find thy mother,  who is waiting for thee.’    So he ran in, filled with wonder and great gladness.
But when he saw her  who was waiting there, he laughed scornfully and said, ‘Why, where is my  mother?
For I see none here but this vile beggar-woman.’    And the woman answered him, ‘I am thy mother.’    ‘Thou art mad to say so,’ cried the Star-Child angrily.
‘I am no son of  thine, for thou art a beggar, and ugly, and in rags.
Therefore get thee  hence, and let me see thy foul face no more.’    ‘Nay, but thou art indeed my little son, whom I bare in the forest,’ she  cried, and she fell on her knees, and held out her arms to him.
‘The  robbers stole thee from me, and left thee to die,’ she murmured, ‘but I  recognised thee when I saw thee, and the signs also have I recognised,  the cloak of golden tissue and the amber chain.
Therefore I pray thee  come with me, for over the whole world have I wandered in search of thee.
Come with me, my son, for I have need of thy love.’    But the Star-Child stirred not from his place, but shut the doors of his  heart against her, nor was there any sound heard save the sound of the  woman weeping for pain.
And at last he spoke to her, and his voice was hard and bitter.
‘If in  very truth thou art my mother,’ he said, ‘it had been better hadst thou  stayed away, and not come here to bring me to shame, seeing that I  thought I was the child of some Star, and not a beggar’s child, as thou  tellest me that I am.
Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thee no  more.’    ‘Alas! my son,’ she cried, ‘wilt thou not kiss me before I go?
For I  have suffered much to find thee.’    ‘Nay,’ said the Star-Child, ‘but thou art too foul to look at, and rather  would I kiss the adder or the toad than thee.’    So the woman rose up, and went away into the forest weeping bitterly, and  when the Star-Child saw that she had gone, he was glad, and ran back to  his playmates that he might play with them.
But when they beheld him coming, they mocked him and said, ‘Why, thou art  as foul as the toad, and as loathsome as the adder.
Get thee hence, for  we will not suffer thee to play with us,’ and they drave him out of the  garden.
And the Star-Child frowned and said to himself, ‘What is this that they  say to me?
I will go to the well of water and look into it, and it shall  tell me of my beauty.’    So he went to the well of water and looked into it, and lo! his face was  as the face of a toad, and his body was sealed like an adder.
And he  flung himself down on the grass and wept, and said to himself, ‘Surely  this has come upon me by reason of my sin.
For I have denied my mother,  and driven her away, and been proud, and cruel to her.
Wherefore I will  go and seek her through the whole world, nor will I rest till I have  found her.’    And there came to him the little daughter of the Woodcutter, and she put  her hand upon his shoulder and said, ‘What doth it matter if thou hast  lost thy comeliness?
Stay with us, and I will not mock at thee.’    And he said to her, ‘Nay, but I have been cruel to my mother, and as a  punishment has this evil been sent to me.
Wherefore I must go hence, and  wander through the world till I find her, and she give me her  forgiveness.’    So he ran away into the forest and called out to his mother to come to  him, but there was no answer.
All day long he called to her, and, when  the sun set he lay down to sleep on a bed of leaves, and the birds and  the animals fled from him, for they remembered his cruelty, and he was  alone save for the toad that watched him, and the slow adder that crawled  past.
And in the morning he rose up, and plucked some bitter berries from the  trees and ate them, and took his way through the great wood, weeping  sorely.
And of everything that he met he made inquiry if perchance they  had seen his mother.
He said to the Mole, ‘Thou canst go beneath the earth.
Tell me, is my  mother there?’    And the Mole answered, ‘Thou hast blinded mine eyes.
How should I know?’    He said to the Linnet, ‘Thou canst fly over the tops of the tall trees,  and canst see the whole world.
Tell me, canst thou see my mother?’    And the Linnet answered, ‘Thou hast clipt my wings for thy pleasure.
How  should I fly?’    And to the little Squirrel who lived in the fir-tree, and was lonely, he  said, ‘Where is my mother?’    And the Squirrel answered, ‘Thou hast slain mine.
Dost thou seek to slay  thine also?’    And the Star-Child wept and bowed his head, and prayed forgiveness of  God’s things, and went on through the forest, seeking for the  beggar-woman.
And on the third day he came to the other side of the  forest and went down into the plain.
And when he passed through the villages the children mocked him, and  threw stones at him, and the carlots would not suffer him even to sleep  in the byres lest he might bring mildew on the stored corn, so foul was  he to look at, and their hired men drave him away, and there was none who  had pity on him.
Nor could he hear anywhere of the beggar-woman who was  his mother, though for the space of three years he wandered over the  world, and often seemed to see her on the road in front of him, and would  call to her, and run after her till the sharp flints made his feet to  bleed.
But overtake her he could not, and those who dwelt by the way did  ever deny that they had seen her, or any like to her, and they made sport  of his sorrow.
For the space of three years he wandered over the world, and in the world  there was neither love nor loving-kindness nor charity for him, but it  was even such a world as he had made for himself in the days of his great  pride.
And one evening he came to the gate of a strong-walled city that stood by  a river, and, weary and footsore though he was, he made to enter in.
But  the soldiers who stood on guard dropped their halberts across the  entrance, and said roughly to him, ‘What is thy business in the city?’    ‘I am seeking for my mother,’ he answered, ‘and I pray ye to suffer me to  pass, for it may be that she is in this city.’    But they mocked at him, and one of them wagged a black beard, and set  down his shield and cried, ‘Of a truth, thy mother will not be merry when  she sees thee, for thou art more ill-favoured than the toad of the marsh,  or the adder that crawls in the fen.
Get thee gone.
Get thee gone.
Thy  mother dwells not in this city.’    And another, who held a yellow banner in his hand, said to him, ‘Who is  thy mother, and wherefore art thou seeking for her?’    And he answered, ‘My mother is a beggar even as I am, and I have treated  her evilly, and I pray ye to suffer me to pass that she may give me her  forgiveness, if it be that she tarrieth in this city.’  But they would  not, and pricked him with their spears.
And, as he turned away weeping, one whose armour was inlaid with gilt  flowers, and on whose helmet couched a lion that had wings, came up and  made inquiry of the soldiers who it was who had sought entrance.
And  they said to him, ‘It is a beggar and the child of a beggar, and we have  driven him away.’    ‘Nay,’ he cried, laughing, ‘but we will sell the foul thing for a slave,  and his price shall be the price of a bowl of sweet wine.’    And an old and evil-visaged man who was passing by called out, and said,  ‘I will buy him for that price,’ and, when he had paid the price, he took  the Star-Child by the hand and led him into the city.
And after that they had gone through many streets they came to a little  door that was set in a wall that was covered with a pomegranate tree.
And the old man touched the door with a ring of graved jasper and it  opened, and they went down five steps of brass into a garden filled with  black poppies and green jars of burnt clay.
And the old man took then  from his turban a scarf of figured silk, and bound with it the eyes of  the Star-Child, and drave him in front of him.
And when the scarf was  taken off his eyes, the Star-Child found himself in a dungeon, that was  lit by a lantern of horn.
And the old man set before him some mouldy bread on a trencher and said,  ‘Eat,’ and some brackish water in a cup and said, ‘Drink,’ and when he  had eaten and drunk, the old man went out, locking the door behind him  and fastening it with an iron chain.
And on the morrow the old man, who was indeed the subtlest of the  magicians of Libya and had learned his art from one who dwelt in the  tombs of the Nile, came in to him and frowned at him, and said, ‘In a  wood that is nigh to the gate of this city of Giaours there are three  pieces of gold.
One is of white gold, and another is of yellow gold, and  the gold of the third one is red.
To-day thou shalt bring me the piece  of white gold, and if thou bringest it not back, I will beat thee with a  hundred stripes.
Get thee away quickly, and at sunset I will be waiting  for thee at the door of the garden.
See that thou bringest the white  gold, or it shall go ill with thee, for thou art my slave, and I have  bought thee for the price of a bowl of sweet wine.’  And he bound the  eyes of the Star-Child with the scarf of figured silk, and led him  through the house, and through the garden of poppies, and up the five  steps of brass.
And having opened the little door with his ring he set  him in the street.
And the Star-Child went out of the gate of the city, and came to the wood  of which the Magician had spoken to him.
Now this wood was very fair to look at from without, and seemed full of  singing birds and of sweet-scented flowers, and the Star-Child entered it  gladly.
Yet did its beauty profit him little, for wherever he went harsh  briars and thorns shot up from the ground and encompassed him, and evil  nettles stung him, and the thistle pierced him with her daggers, so that  he was in sore distress.
Nor could he anywhere find the piece of white  gold of which the Magician had spoken, though he sought for it from morn  to noon, and from noon to sunset.
And at sunset he set his face towards  home, weeping bitterly, for he knew what fate was in store for him.
But when he had reached the outskirts of the wood, he heard from a  thicket a cry as of some one in pain.
And forgetting his own sorrow he  ran back to the place, and saw there a little Hare caught in a trap that  some hunter had set for it.
And the Star-Child had pity on it, and released it, and said to it, ‘I am  myself but a slave, yet may I give thee thy freedom.’    And the Hare answered him, and said: ‘Surely thou hast given me freedom,  and what shall I give thee in return?’    And the Star-Child said to it, ‘I am seeking for a piece of white gold,  nor can I anywhere find it, and if I bring it not to my master he will  beat me.’    ‘Come thou with me,’ said the Hare, ‘and I will lead thee to it, for I  know where it is hidden, and for what purpose.’    So the Star-Child went with the Hare, and lo! in the cleft of a great  oak-tree he saw the piece of white gold that he was seeking.
And he was  filled with joy, and seized it, and said to the Hare, ‘The service that I  did to thee thou hast rendered back again many times over, and the  kindness that I showed thee thou hast repaid a hundred-fold.’    ‘Nay,’ answered the Hare, ‘but as thou dealt with me, so I did deal with  thee,’ and it ran away swiftly, and the Star-Child went towards the city.
Now at the gate of the city there was seated one who was a leper.
Over  his face hung a cowl of grey linen, and through the eyelets his eyes  gleamed like red coals.
And when he saw the Star-Child coming, he struck  upon a wooden bowl, and clattered his bell, and called out to him, and  said, ‘Give me a piece of money, or I must die of hunger.
For they have  thrust me out of the city, and there is no one who has pity on me.’    ‘Alas!’ cried the Star-Child, ‘I have but one piece of money in my  wallet, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me, for I am his  slave.’    But the leper entreated him, and prayed of him, till the Star-Child had  pity, and gave him the piece of white gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and  brought him in, and said to him, ‘Hast thou the piece of white gold?’  And the Star-Child answered, ‘I have it not.’  So the Magician fell upon  him, and beat him, and set before him an empty trencher, and said, ‘Eat,’  and an empty cup, and said, ‘Drink,’ and flung him again into the  dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, ‘If to-day thou  bringest me not the piece of yellow gold, I will surely keep thee as my  slave, and give thee three hundred stripes.’    So the Star-Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the  piece of yellow gold, but nowhere could he find it.
And at sunset he sat  him down and began to weep, and as he was weeping there came to him the  little Hare that he had rescued from the trap.
And the Hare said to him, ‘Why art thou weeping?
And what dost thou seek  in the wood?’    And the Star-Child answered, ‘I am seeking for a piece of yellow gold  that is hidden here, and if I find it not my master will beat me, and  keep me as a slave.’    ‘Follow me,’ cried the Hare, and it ran through the wood till it came to  a pool of water.
And at the bottom of the pool the piece of yellow gold  was lying.
‘How shall I thank thee?’ said the Star-Child, ‘for lo! this is the  second time that you have succoured me.’    ‘Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,’ said the Hare, and it ran away  swiftly.
And the Star-Child took the piece of yellow gold, and put it in his  wallet, and hurried to the city.
But the leper saw him coming, and ran  to meet him, and knelt down and cried, ‘Give me a piece of money or I  shall die of hunger.’    And the Star-Child said to him, ‘I have in my wallet but one piece of  yellow gold, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me and keep  me as his slave.’    But the leper entreated him sore, so that the Star-Child had pity on him,  and gave him the piece of yellow gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and  brought him in, and said to him, ‘Hast thou the piece of yellow gold?’  And the Star-Child said to him, ‘I have it not.’  So the Magician fell  upon him, and beat him, and loaded him with chains, and cast him again  into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, ‘If to-day thou  bringest me the piece of red gold I will set thee free, but if thou  bringest it not I will surely slay thee.’    So the Star-Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the  piece of red gold, but nowhere could he find it.
And at evening he sat  him down and wept, and as he was weeping there came to him the little  Hare.
And the Hare said to him, ‘The piece of red gold that thou seekest is in  the cavern that is behind thee.
Therefore weep no more but be glad.’    ‘How shall I reward thee?’ cried the Star-Child, ‘for lo! this is the  third time thou hast succoured me.’    ‘Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,’ said the Hare, and it ran away  swiftly.
And the Star-Child entered the cavern, and in its farthest corner he  found the piece of red gold.
So he put it in his wallet, and hurried to  the city.
And the leper seeing him coming, stood in the centre of the  road, and cried out, and said to him, ‘Give me the piece of red money, or  I must die,’ and the Star-Child had pity on him again, and gave him the  piece of red gold, saying, ‘Thy need is greater than mine.’  Yet was his  heart heavy, for he knew what evil fate awaited him.
But lo! as he passed through the gate of the city, the guards bowed down  and made obeisance to him, saying, ‘How beautiful is our lord!’ and a  crowd of citizens followed him, and cried out, ‘Surely there is none so  beautiful in the whole world!’ so that the Star-Child wept, and said to  himself, ‘They are mocking me, and making light of my misery.’  And so  large was the concourse of the people, that he lost the threads of his  way, and found himself at last in a great square, in which there was a  palace of a King.
And the gate of the palace opened, and the priests and the high officers  of the city ran forth to meet him, and they abased themselves before him,  and said, ‘Thou art our lord for whom we have been waiting, and the son  of our King.’    And the Star-Child answered them and said, ‘I am no king’s son, but the  child of a poor beggar-woman.
And how say ye that I am beautiful, for I  know that I am evil to look at?’    Then he, whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose helmet  crouched a lion that had wings, held up a shield, and cried, ‘How saith  my lord that he is not beautiful?’    And the Star-Child looked, and lo! his face was even as it had been, and  his comeliness had come back to him, and he saw that in his eyes which he  had not seen there before.
And the priests and the high officers knelt down and said to him, ‘It was  prophesied of old that on this day should come he who was to rule over  us.
Therefore, let our lord take this crown and this sceptre, and be in  his justice and mercy our King over us.’    But he said to them, ‘I am not worthy, for I have denied the mother who  bare me, nor may I rest till I have found her, and known her forgiveness.
Therefore, let me go, for I must wander again over the world, and may not  tarry here, though ye bring me the crown and the sceptre.’  And as he  spake he turned his face from them towards the street that led to the  gate of the city, and lo! amongst the crowd that pressed round the  soldiers, he saw the beggar-woman who was his mother, and at her side  stood the leper, who had sat by the road.
And a cry of joy broke from his lips, and he ran over, and kneeling down  he kissed the wounds on his mother’s feet, and wet them with his tears.
He bowed his head in the dust, and sobbing, as one whose heart might  break, he said to her: ‘Mother, I denied thee in the hour of my pride.
Accept me in the hour of my humility.
Mother, I gave thee hatred.
Do  thou give me love.
Mother, I rejected thee.
Receive thy child now.’  But the beggar-woman answered him not a word.
And he reached out his hands, and clasped the white feet of the leper,  and said to him: ‘Thrice did I give thee of my mercy.
Bid my mother  speak to me once.’  But the leper answered him not a word.
And he sobbed again and said: ‘Mother, my suffering is greater than I can  bear.
Give me thy forgiveness, and let me go back to the forest.’  And  the beggar-woman put her hand on his head, and said to him, ‘Rise,’ and  the leper put his hand on his head, and said to him, ‘Rise,’ also.
And he rose up from his feet, and looked at them, and lo! they were a  King and a Queen.
And the Queen said to him, ‘This is thy father whom thou hast succoured.’  And the King said, ‘This is thy mother whose feet thou hast washed with  thy tears.’  And they fell on his neck and kissed him, and brought him  into the palace and clothed him in fair raiment, and set the crown upon  his head, and the sceptre in his hand, and over the city that stood by  the river he ruled, and was its lord.
Much justice and mercy did he show  to all, and the evil Magician he banished, and to the Woodcutter and his  wife he sent many rich gifts, and to their children he gave high honour.
Nor would he suffer any to be cruel to bird or beast, but taught love and  loving-kindness and charity, and to the poor he gave bread, and to the  naked he gave raiment, and there was peace and plenty in the land.
Yet ruled he not long, so great had been his suffering, and so bitter the  fire of his testing, for after the space of three years he died.
And he  who came after him ruled evilly.It was Lady Windermere’s last reception before Easter, and Bentinck House was even more crowded than usual.
Six Cabinet Ministers had come on from the Speaker’s Levée in their stars and ribands, all the pretty women wore their smartest dresses, and at the end of the picture-gallery stood the Princess Sophia of Carlsrühe, a heavy Tartar-looking lady, with tiny black eyes and wonderful emeralds, talking bad French at the top of her voice, and laughing immoderately at everything that was said to her.
It was certainly a wonderful medley of people.
Gorgeous peeresses chatted affably to violent Radicals, popular preachers brushed coat-tails with eminent sceptics, a perfect bevy of bishops kept following a stout prima-donna from room to room, on the staircase stood several Royal Academicians, disguised as artists, and it was said that at one time the supper-room was absolutely crammed with geniuses.
In fact, it was one of Lady Windermere’s best nights, and the Princess stayed till nearly half-past eleven.
As soon as she had gone, Lady Windermere returned to the picture-gallery, where a celebrated political economist was solemnly explaining the scientific theory of music to an indignant virtuoso from Hungary, and began to talk to the Duchess of Paisley.
She looked wonderfully beautiful with her grand ivory throat, her large blue forget-me-not eyes, and her heavy coils of golden hair.
_Or pur_ they were—not that pale straw colour that nowadays usurps the gracious name of gold, but such gold as is woven into sunbeams or hidden in strange amber; and they gave to her face something of the frame of a saint, with not a little of the fascination of a sinner.
She was a curious psychological study.
Early in life she had discovered the important truth that nothing looks so like innocence as an indiscretion; and by a series of reckless escapades, half of them quite harmless, she had acquired all the privileges of a personality.
She had more than once changed her husband; indeed, Debrett credits her with three marriages; but as she had never changed her lover, the world had long ago ceased to talk scandal about her.
She was now forty years of age, childless, and with that inordinate passion for pleasure which is the secret of remaining young.
Suddenly she looked eagerly round the room, and said, in her clear contralto voice, ‘Where is my cheiromantist?’  ‘Your what, Gladys?’ exclaimed the Duchess, giving an involuntary start.
‘My cheiromantist, Duchess; I can’t live without him at present.’  ‘Dear Gladys! you are always so original,’ murmured the Duchess, trying to remember what a cheiromantist really was, and hoping it was not the same as a cheiropodist.
‘He comes to see my hand twice a week regularly,’ continued Lady Windermere, ‘and is most interesting about it.’  ‘Good heavens!’ said the Duchess to herself, ‘he is a sort of cheiropodist after all.
How very dreadful.
I hope he is a foreigner at any rate.
It wouldn’t be quite so bad then.’  ‘I must certainly introduce him to you.’  ‘Introduce him!’ cried the Duchess; ‘you don’t mean to say he is here?’ and she began looking about for a small tortoise-shell fan and a very tattered lace shawl, so as to be ready to go at a moment’s notice.
‘Of course he is here; I would not dream of giving a party without him.
He tells me I have a pure psychic hand, and that if my thumb had been the least little bit shorter, I should have been a confirmed pessimist, and gone into a convent.’  ‘Oh, I see!’ said the Duchess, feeling very much relieved; ‘he tells fortunes, I suppose?’  ‘And misfortunes, too,’ answered Lady Windermere, ‘any amount of them.
Next year, for instance, I am in great danger, both by land and sea, so I am going to live in a balloon, and draw up my dinner in a basket every evening.
It is all written down on my little finger, or on the palm of my hand, I forget which.’  ‘But surely that is tempting Providence, Gladys.’  ‘My dear Duchess, surely Providence can resist temptation by this time.
I think every one should have their hands told once a month, so as to know what not to do.
Of course, one does it all the same, but it is so pleasant to be warned.
Now if some one doesn’t go and fetch Mr. Podgers at once, I shall have to go myself.’  ‘Let me go, Lady Windermere,’ said a tall handsome young man, who was standing by, listening to the conversation with an amused smile.
‘Thanks so much, Lord Arthur; but I am afraid you wouldn’t recognise him.’  ‘If he is as wonderful as you say, Lady Windermere, I couldn’t well miss him.
Tell me what he is like, and I’ll bring him to you at once.’  ‘Well, he is not a bit like a cheiromantist.
I mean he is not mysterious, or esoteric, or romantic-looking.
He is a little, stout man, with a funny, bald head, and great gold-rimmed spectacles; something between a family doctor and a country attorney.
I’m really very sorry, but it is not my fault.
People are so annoying.
All my pianists look exactly like poets, and all my poets look exactly like pianists; and I remember last season asking a most dreadful conspirator to dinner, a man who had blown up ever so many people, and always wore a coat of mail, and carried a dagger up his shirt-sleeve; and do you know that when he came he looked just like a nice old clergyman, and cracked jokes all the evening?
Of course, he was very amusing, and all that, but I was awfully disappointed; and when I asked him about the coat of mail, he only laughed, and said it was far too cold to wear in England.
Ah, here is Mr. Podgers!  Now, Mr. Podgers, I want you to tell the Duchess of Paisley’s hand.
Duchess, you must take your glove off.
No, not the left hand, the other.’  ‘Dear Gladys, I really don’t think it is quite right,’ said the Duchess, feebly unbuttoning a rather soiled kid glove.
‘Nothing interesting ever is,’ said Lady Windermere: ‘_on a fait le monde ainsi_.
But I must introduce you.
Duchess, this is Mr. Podgers, my pet cheiromantist.
Mr. Podgers, this is the Duchess of Paisley, and if you say that she has a larger mountain of the moon than I have, I will never believe in you again.’  ‘I am sure, Gladys, there is nothing of the kind in my hand,’ said the Duchess gravely.
‘Your Grace is quite right,’ said Mr. Podgers, glancing at the little fat hand with its short square fingers, ‘the mountain of the moon is not developed.
The line of life, however, is excellent.
Kindly bend the wrist.
Thank you.
Three distinct lines on the _rascette_!  You will live to a great age, Duchess, and be extremely happy.
Ambition—very moderate, line of intellect not exaggerated, line of heart—’  ‘Now, do be indiscreet, Mr. Podgers,’ cried Lady Windermere.
‘Nothing would give me greater pleasure,’ said Mr. Podgers, bowing, ‘if the Duchess ever had been, but I am sorry to say that I see great permanence of affection, combined with a strong sense of duty.’  ‘Pray go on, Mr. Podgers,’ said the Duchess, looking quite pleased.
‘Economy is not the least of your Grace’s virtues,’ continued Mr. Podgers, and Lady Windermere went off into fits of laughter.
‘Economy is a very good thing,’ remarked the Duchess complacently; ‘when I married Paisley he had eleven castles, and not a single house fit to live in.’  ‘And now he has twelve houses, and not a single castle,’ cried Lady Windermere.
‘Well, my dear,’ said the Duchess, ‘I like—’  ‘Comfort,’ said Mr. Podgers, ‘and modern improvements, and hot water laid on in every bedroom.
Your Grace is quite right.
Comfort is the only thing our civilisation can give us.
‘You have told the Duchess’s character admirably, Mr. Podgers, and now you must tell Lady Flora’s’; and in answer to a nod from the smiling hostess, a tall girl, with sandy Scotch hair, and high shoulder-blades, stepped awkwardly from behind the sofa, and held out a long, bony hand with spatulate fingers.
‘Ah, a pianist! I see,’ said Mr. Podgers, ‘an excellent pianist, but perhaps hardly a musician.
Very reserved, very honest, and with a great love of animals.’  ‘Quite true!’ exclaimed the Duchess, turning to Lady Windermere, ‘absolutely true!  Flora keeps two dozen collie dogs at Macloskie, and would turn our town house into a menagerie if her father would let her.’  ‘Well, that is just what I do with my house every Thursday evening,’ cried Lady Windermere, laughing, ‘only I like lions better than collie dogs.’  ‘Your one mistake, Lady Windermere,’ said Mr. Podgers, with a pompous bow.
‘If a woman can’t make her mistakes charming, she is only a female,’ was the answer.
‘But you must read some more hands for us.
Come, Sir Thomas, show Mr. Podgers yours’; and a genial-looking old gentleman, in a white waistcoat, came forward, and held out a thick rugged hand, with a very long third finger.
‘An adventurous nature; four long voyages in the past, and one to come.
Been ship-wrecked three times.
No, only twice, but in danger of a shipwreck your next journey.
A strong Conservative, very punctual, and with a passion for collecting curiosities.
Had a severe illness between the ages sixteen and eighteen.
Was left a fortune when about thirty.
Great aversion to cats and Radicals.’  ‘Extraordinary!’ exclaimed Sir Thomas; ‘you must really tell my wife’s hand, too.’  ‘Your second wife’s,’ said Mr. Podgers quietly, still keeping Sir Thomas’s hand in his.
‘Your second wife’s.
I shall be charmed’; but Lady Marvel, a melancholy-looking woman, with brown hair and sentimental eyelashes, entirely declined to have her past or her future exposed; and nothing that Lady Windermere could do would induce Monsieur de Koloff, the Russian Ambassador, even to take his gloves off.
In fact, many people seemed afraid to face the odd little man with his stereotyped smile, his gold spectacles, and his bright, beady eyes; and when he told poor Lady Fermor, right out before every one, that she did not care a bit for music, but was extremely fond of musicians, it was generally felt that cheiromancy was a most dangerous science, and one that ought not to be encouraged, except in a _tête-à-tête_.
Lord Arthur Savile, however, who did not know anything about Lady Fermor’s unfortunate story, and who had been watching Mr. Podgers with a great deal of interest, was filled with an immense curiosity to have his own hand read, and feeling somewhat shy about putting himself forward, crossed over the room to where Lady Windermere was sitting, and, with a charming blush, asked her if she thought Mr. Podgers would mind.
‘Of course, he won’t mind,’ said Lady Windermere, ‘that is what he is here for.
All my lions, Lord Arthur, are performing lions, and jump through hoops whenever I ask them.
But I must warn you beforehand that I shall tell Sybil everything.
She is coming to lunch with me to-morrow, to talk about bonnets, and if Mr. Podgers finds out that you have a bad temper, or a tendency to gout, or a wife living in Bayswater, I shall certainly let her know all about it.’  Lord Arthur smiled, and shook his head.
‘I am not afraid,’ he answered.
‘Sybil knows me as well as I know her.’  ‘Ah!  I am a little sorry to hear you say that.
The proper basis for marriage is a mutual misunderstanding.
No, I am not at all cynical, I have merely got experience, which, however, is very much the same thing.
Mr. Podgers, Lord Arthur Savile is dying to have his hand read.
Don’t tell him that he is engaged to one of the most beautiful girls in London, because that appeared in the _Morning Post_ a month ago.
‘Dear Lady Windermere,’ cried the Marchioness of Jedburgh, ‘do let Mr. Podgers stay here a little longer.
He has just told me I should go on the stage, and I am so interested.’  ‘If he has told you that, Lady Jedburgh, I shall certainly take him away.
Come over at once, Mr. Podgers, and read Lord Arthur’s hand.’  ‘Well,’ said Lady Jedburgh, making a little _moue_ as she rose from the sofa, ‘if I am not to be allowed to go on the stage, I must be allowed to be part of the audience at any rate.’  ‘Of course; we are all going to be part of the audience,’ said Lady Windermere; ‘and now, Mr. Podgers, be sure and tell us something nice.
Lord Arthur is one of my special favourites.’  But when Mr. Podgers saw Lord Arthur’s hand he grew curiously pale, and said nothing.
A shudder seemed to pass through him, and his great bushy eyebrows twitched convulsively, in an odd, irritating way they had when he was puzzled.
Then some huge beads of perspiration broke out on his yellow forehead, like a poisonous dew, and his fat fingers grew cold and clammy.
Lord Arthur did not fail to notice these strange signs of agitation, and, for the first time in his life, he himself felt fear.
His impulse was to rush from the room, but he restrained himself.
It was better to know the worst, whatever it was, than to be left in this hideous uncertainty.
‘I am waiting, Mr. Podgers,’ he said.
‘We are all waiting,’ cried Lady Windermere, in her quick, impatient manner, but the cheiromantist made no reply.
‘I believe Arthur is going on the stage,’ said Lady Jedburgh, ‘and that, after your scolding, Mr. Podgers is afraid to tell him so.’  Suddenly Mr. Podgers dropped Lord Arthur’s right hand, and seized hold of his left, bending down so low to examine it that the gold rims of his spectacles seemed almost to touch the palm.
For a moment his face became a white mask of horror, but he soon recovered his _sang-froid_, and looking up at Lady Windermere, said with a forced smile, ‘It is the hand of a charming young man.
‘Of course it is!’ answered Lady Windermere, ‘but will he be a charming husband?
That is what I want to know.’  ‘All charming young men are,’ said Mr. Podgers.
‘I don’t think a husband should be too fascinating,’ murmured Lady Jedburgh pensively, ‘it is so dangerous.’  ‘My dear child, they never are too fascinating,’ cried Lady Windermere.
‘But what I want are details.
Details are the only things that interest.
What is going to happen to Lord Arthur?’  ‘Well, within the next few months Lord Arthur will go a voyage—’  ‘Oh yes, his honeymoon, of course!’  ‘And lose a relative.’  ‘Not his sister, I hope?’ said Lady Jedburgh, in a piteous tone of voice.
‘Certainly not his sister,’ answered Mr. Podgers, with a deprecating wave of the hand, ‘a distant relative merely.’  ‘Well, I am dreadfully disappointed,’ said Lady Windermere.
‘I have absolutely nothing to tell Sybil to-morrow.
No one cares about distant relatives nowadays.
They went out of fashion years ago.
However, I suppose she had better have a black silk by her; it always does for church, you know.
And now let us go to supper.
They are sure to have eaten everything up, but we may find some hot soup.
François used to make excellent soup once, but he is so agitated about politics at present, that I never feel quite certain about him.
I do wish General Boulanger would keep quiet.
Duchess, I am sure you are tired?’  ‘Not at all, dear Gladys,’ answered the Duchess, waddling towards the door.
‘I have enjoyed myself immensely, and the cheiropodist, I mean the cheiromantist, is most interesting.
Flora, where can my tortoise-shell fan be?
Oh, thank you, Sir Thomas, so much.
And my lace shawl, Flora?
Oh, thank you, Sir Thomas, very kind, I’m sure’; and the worthy creature finally managed to get downstairs without dropping her scent-bottle more than twice.
All this time Lord Arthur Savile had remained standing by the fireplace, with the same feeling of dread over him, the same sickening sense of coming evil.
He smiled sadly at his sister, as she swept past him on Lord Plymdale’s arm, looking lovely in her pink brocade and pearls, and he hardly heard Lady Windermere when she called to him to follow her.
He thought of Sybil Merton, and the idea that anything could come between them made his eyes dim with tears.
Looking at him, one would have said that Nemesis had stolen the shield of Pallas, and shown him the Gorgon’s head.
He seemed turned to stone, and his face was like marble in its melancholy.
He had lived the delicate and luxurious life of a young man of birth and fortune, a life exquisite in its freedom from sordid care, its beautiful boyish insouciance; and now for the first time he became conscious of the terrible mystery of Destiny, of the awful meaning of Doom.
How mad and monstrous it all seemed!  Could it be that written on his hand, in characters that he could not read himself, but that another could decipher, was some fearful secret of sin, some blood-red sign of crime?
Was there no escape possible?
Were we no better than chessmen, moved by an unseen power, vessels the potter fashions at his fancy, for honour or for shame?
His reason revolted against it, and yet he felt that some tragedy was hanging over him, and that he had been suddenly called upon to bear an intolerable burden.
Actors are so fortunate.
They can choose whether they will appear in tragedy or in comedy, whether they will suffer or make merry, laugh or shed tears.
But in real life it is different.
Most men and women are forced to perform parts for which they have no qualifications.
Our Guildensterns play Hamlet for us, and our Hamlets have to jest like Prince Hal.
The world is a stage, but the play is badly cast.
Suddenly Mr. Podgers entered the room.
When he saw Lord Arthur he started, and his coarse, fat face became a sort of greenish-yellow colour.
The two men’s eyes met, and for a moment there was silence.
‘The Duchess has left one of her gloves here, Lord Arthur, and has asked me to bring it to her,’ said Mr. Podgers finally.
‘Ah, I see it on the sofa!  Good evening.’  ‘Mr. Podgers, I must insist on your giving me a straightforward answer to a question I am going to put to you.’  ‘Another time, Lord Arthur, but the Duchess is anxious.
I am afraid I must go.’  ‘You shall not go.
The Duchess is in no hurry.’  ‘Ladies should not be kept waiting, Lord Arthur,’ said Mr. Podgers, with his sickly smile.
‘The fair sex is apt to be impatient.’  Lord Arthur’s finely-chiselled lips curled in petulant disdain.
The poor Duchess seemed to him of very little importance at that moment.
He walked across the room to where Mr. Podgers was standing, and held his hand out.
‘Tell me what you saw there,’ he said.
‘Tell me the truth.
I must know it.
I am not a child.’  Mr. Podgers’s eyes blinked behind his gold-rimmed spectacles, and he moved uneasily from one foot to the other, while his fingers played nervously with a flash watch-chain.
‘What makes you think that I saw anything in your hand, Lord Arthur, more than I told you?’  ‘I know you did, and I insist on your telling me what it was.
I will pay you.
I will give you a cheque for a hundred pounds.’  The green eyes flashed for a moment, and then became dull again.
‘Guineas?’ said Mr. Podgers at last, in a low voice.
‘Certainly.
I will send you a cheque to-morrow.
What is your club?’  ‘I have no club.
That is to say, not just at present.
My address is—, but allow me to give you my card’; and producing a bit of gilt-edge pasteboard from his waistcoat pocket, Mr. Podgers handed it, with a low bow, to Lord Arthur, who read on it,                            _Mr. SEPTIMUS R.
PODGERS_                          _Professional Cheiromantist_                           103_a_ _West Moon Street_  ‘My hours are from ten to four,’ murmured Mr. Podgers mechanically, ‘and I make a reduction for families.’  ‘Be quick,’ cried Lord Arthur, looking very pale, and holding his hand out.
Mr. Podgers glanced nervously round, and drew the heavy _portière_ across the door.
‘It will take a little time, Lord Arthur, you had better sit down.’  ‘Be quick, sir,’ cried Lord Arthur again, stamping his foot angrily on the polished floor.
Mr. Podgers smiled, drew from his breast-pocket a small magnifying glass, and wiped it carefully with his handkerchief.
‘I am quite ready,’ he said.
TEN minutes later, with face blanched by terror, and eyes wild with grief, Lord Arthur Savile rushed from Bentinck House, crushing his way through the crowd of fur-coated footmen that stood round the large striped awning, and seeming not to see or hear anything.
The night was bitter cold, and the gas-lamps round the square flared and flickered in the keen wind; but his hands were hot with fever, and his forehead burned like fire.
On and on he went, almost with the gait of a drunken man.
A policeman looked curiously at him as he passed, and a beggar, who slouched from an archway to ask for alms, grew frightened, seeing misery greater than his own.
Once he stopped under a lamp, and looked at his hands.
He thought he could detect the stain of blood already upon them, and a faint cry broke from his trembling lips.
Murder! that is what the cheiromantist had seen there.
Murder!  The very night seemed to know it, and the desolate wind to howl it in his ear.
The dark corners of the streets were full of it.
It grinned at him from the roofs of the houses.
First he came to the Park, whose sombre woodland seemed to fascinate him.
He leaned wearily up against the railings, cooling his brow against the wet metal, and listening to the tremulous silence of the trees.
‘Murder! murder!’ he kept repeating, as though iteration could dim the horror of the word.
The sound of his own voice made him shudder, yet he almost hoped that Echo might hear him, and wake the slumbering city from its dreams.
He felt a mad desire to stop the casual passer-by, and tell him everything.
Then he wandered across Oxford Street into narrow, shameful alleys.
Two women with painted faces mocked at him as he went by.
From a dark courtyard came a sound of oaths and blows, followed by shrill screams, and, huddled upon a damp door-step, he saw the crook-backed forms of poverty and eld.
A strange pity came over him.
Were these children of sin and misery predestined to their end, as he to his?
Were they, like him, merely the puppets of a monstrous show?
And yet it was not the mystery, but the comedy of suffering that struck him; its absolute uselessness, its grotesque want of meaning.
How incoherent everything seemed!  How lacking in all harmony!  He was amazed at the discord between the shallow optimism of the day, and the real facts of existence.
He was still very young.
After a time he found himself in front of Marylebone Church.
The silent roadway looked like a long riband of polished silver, flecked here and there by the dark arabesques of waving shadows.
Far into the distance curved the line of flickering gas-lamps, and outside a little walled-in house stood a solitary hansom, the driver asleep inside.
He walked hastily in the direction of Portland Place, now and then looking round, as though he feared that he was being followed.
At the corner of Rich Street stood two men, reading a small bill upon a hoarding.
An odd feeling of curiosity stirred him, and he crossed over.
As he came near, the word ‘Murder,’ printed in black letters, met his eye.
He started, and a deep flush came into his cheek.
It was an advertisement offering a reward for any information leading to the arrest of a man of medium height, between thirty and forty years of age, wearing a billy-cock hat, a black coat, and check trousers, and with a scar upon his right cheek.
He read it over and over again, and wondered if the wretched man would be caught, and how he had been scarred.
Perhaps, some day, his own name might be placarded on the walls of London.
Some day, perhaps, a price would be set on his head also.
The thought made him sick with horror.
He turned on his heel, and hurried on into the night.
Where he went he hardly knew.
He had a dim memory of wandering through a labyrinth of sordid houses, of being lost in a giant web of sombre streets, and it was bright dawn when he found himself at last in Piccadilly Circus.
As he strolled home towards Belgrave Square, he met the great waggons on their way to Covent Garden.
The white-smocked carters, with their pleasant sunburnt faces and coarse curly hair, strode sturdily on, cracking their whips, and calling out now and then to each other; on the back of a huge grey horse, the leader of a jangling team, sat a chubby boy, with a bunch of primroses in his battered hat, keeping tight hold of the mane with his little hands, and laughing; and the great piles of vegetables looked like masses of jade against the morning sky, like masses of green jade against the pink petals of some marvellous rose.
Lord Arthur felt curiously affected, he could not tell why.
There was something in the dawn’s delicate loveliness that seemed to him inexpressibly pathetic, and he thought of all the days that break in beauty, and that set in storm.
These rustics, too, with their rough, good-humoured voices, and their nonchalant ways, what a strange London they saw!  A London free from the sin of night and the smoke of day, a pallid, ghost-like city, a desolate town of tombs!  He wondered what they thought of it, and whether they knew anything of its splendour and its shame, of its fierce, fiery-coloured joys, and its horrible hunger, of all it makes and mars from morn to eve.
Probably it was to them merely a mart where they brought their fruits to sell, and where they tarried for a few hours at most, leaving the streets still silent, the houses still asleep.
It gave him pleasure to watch them as they went by.
Rude as they were, with their heavy, hob-nailed shoes, and their awkward gait, they brought a little of a ready with them.
He felt that they had lived with Nature, and that she had taught them peace.
He envied them all that they did not know.
By the time he had reached Belgrave Square the sky was a faint blue, and the birds were beginning to twitter in the gardens.
WHEN Lord Arthur woke it was twelve o’clock, and the midday sun was streaming through the ivory-silk curtains of his room.
He got up and looked out of the window.
A dim haze of heat was hanging over the great city, and the roofs of the houses were like dull silver.
In the flickering green of the square below some children were flitting about like white butterflies, and the pavement was crowded with people on their way to the Park.
Never had life seemed lovelier to him, never had the things of evil seemed more remote.
Then his valet brought him a cup of chocolate on a tray.
After he had drunk it, he drew aside a heavy _portière_ of peach-coloured plush, and passed into the bathroom.
The light stole softly from above, through thin slabs of transparent onyx, and the water in the marble tank glimmered like a moonstone.
He plunged hastily in, till the cool ripples touched throat and hair, and then dipped his head right under, as though he would have wiped away the stain of some shameful memory.
When he stepped out he felt almost at peace.
The exquisite physical conditions of the moment had dominated him, as indeed often happens in the case of very finely-wrought natures, for the senses, like fire, can purify as well as destroy.
After breakfast, he flung himself down on a divan, and lit a cigarette.
On the mantel-shelf, framed in dainty old brocade, stood a large photograph of Sybil Merton, as he had seen her first at Lady Noel’s ball.
The small, exquisitely-shaped head drooped slightly to one side, as though the thin, reed-like throat could hardly bear the burden of so much beauty; the lips were slightly parted, and seemed made for sweet music; and all the tender purity of girlhood looked out in wonder from the dreaming eyes.
With her soft, clinging dress of _crêpe-de-chine_, and her large leaf-shaped fan, she looked like one of those delicate little figures men find in the olive-woods near Tanagra; and there was a touch of Greek grace in her pose and attitude.
Yet she was not _petite_.
She was simply perfectly proportioned—a rare thing in an age when so many women are either over life-size or insignificant.
Now as Lord Arthur looked at her, he was filled with the terrible pity that is born of love.
He felt that to marry her, with the doom of murder hanging over his head, would be a betrayal like that of Judas, a sin worse than any the Borgia had ever dreamed of.
What happiness could there be for them, when at any moment he might be called upon to carry out the awful prophecy written in his hand?
What manner of life would be theirs while Fate still held this fearful fortune in the scales?
The marriage must be postponed, at all costs.
Of this he was quite resolved.
Ardently though he loved the girl, and the mere touch of her fingers, when they sat together, made each nerve of his body thrill with exquisite joy, he recognised none the less clearly where his duty lay, and was fully conscious of the fact that he had no right to marry until he had committed the murder.
This done, he could stand before the altar with Sybil Merton, and give his life into her hands without terror of wrongdoing.
This done, he could take her to his arms, knowing that she would never have to blush for him, never have to hang her head in shame.
But done it must be first; and the sooner the better for both.
Many men in his position would have preferred the primrose path of dalliance to the steep heights of duty; but Lord Arthur was too conscientious to set pleasure above principle.
There was more than mere passion in his love; and Sybil was to him a symbol of all that is good and noble.
For a moment he had a natural repugnance against what he was asked to do, but it soon passed away.
His heart told him that it was not a sin, but a sacrifice; his reason reminded him that there was no other course open.
He had to choose between living for himself and living for others, and terrible though the task laid upon him undoubtedly was, yet he knew that he must not suffer selfishness to triumph over love.
Sooner or later we are all called upon to decide on the same issue—of us all, the same question is asked.
To Lord Arthur it came early in life—before his nature had been spoiled by the calculating cynicism of middle-age, or his heart corroded by the shallow, fashionable egotism of our day, and he felt no hesitation about doing his duty.
Fortunately also, for him, he was no mere dreamer, or idle dilettante.
Had he been so, he would have hesitated, like Hamlet, and let irresolution mar his purpose.
But he was essentially practical.
Life to him meant action, rather than thought.
He had that rarest of all things, common sense.
The wild, turbid feelings of the previous night had by this time completely passed away, and it was almost with a sense of shame that he looked back upon his mad wanderings from street to street, his fierce emotional agony.
The very sincerity of his sufferings made them seem unreal to him now.
He wondered how he could have been so foolish as to rant and rave about the inevitable.
The only question that seemed to trouble him was, whom to make away with; for he was not blind to the fact that murder, like the religions of the Pagan world, requires a victim as well as a priest.
Not being a genius, he had no enemies, and indeed he felt that this was not the time for the gratification of any personal pique or dislike, the mission in which he was engaged being one of great and grave solemnity.
He accordingly made out a list of his friends and relatives on a sheet of notepaper, and after careful consideration, decided in favour of Lady Clementina Beauchamp, a dear old lady who lived in Curzon Street, and was his own second cousin by his mother’s side.
He had always been very fond of Lady Clem, as every one called her, and as he was very wealthy himself, having come into all Lord Rugby’s property when he came of age, there was no possibility of his deriving any vulgar monetary advantage by her death.
In fact, the more he thought over the matter, the more she seemed to him to be just the right person, and, feeling that any delay would be unfair to Sybil, he determined to make his arrangements at once.
The first thing to be done was, of course, to settle with the cheiromantist; so he sat down at a small Sheraton writing-table that stood near the window, drew a cheque for £105, payable to the order of Mr. Septimus Podgers, and, enclosing it in an envelope, told his valet to take it to West Moon Street.
He then telephoned to the stables for his hansom, and dressed to go out.
As he was leaving the room he looked back at Sybil Merton’s photograph, and swore that, come what may, he would never let her know what he was doing for her sake, but would keep the secret of his self-sacrifice hidden always in his heart.
On his way to the Buckingham, he stopped at a florist’s, and sent Sybil a beautiful basket of narcissus, with lovely white petals and staring pheasants’ eyes, and on arriving at the club, went straight to the library, rang the bell, and ordered the waiter to bring him a lemon-and-soda, and a book on Toxicology.
He had fully decided that poison was the best means to adopt in this troublesome business.
Anything like personal violence was extremely distasteful to him, and besides, he was very anxious not to murder Lady Clementina in any way that might attract public attention, as he hated the idea of being lionised at Lady Windermere’s, or seeing his name figuring in the paragraphs of vulgar society—newspapers.
He had also to think of Sybil’s father and mother, who were rather old-fashioned people, and might possibly object to the marriage if there was anything like a scandal, though he felt certain that if he told them the whole facts of the case they would be the very first to appreciate the motives that had actuated him.
He had every reason, then, to decide in favour of poison.
It was safe, sure, and quiet, and did away with any necessity for painful scenes, to which, like most Englishmen, he had a rooted objection.
Of the science of poisons, however, he knew absolutely nothing, and as the waiter seemed quite unable to find anything in the library but _Ruff’s Guide_ and _Bailey’s Magazine_, he examined the book-shelves himself, and finally came across a handsomely-bound edition of the _Pharmacopoeia_, and a copy of Erskine’s _Toxicology_, edited by Sir Mathew Reid, the President of the Royal College of Physicians, and one of the oldest members of the Buckingham, having been elected in mistake for somebody else; a _contretemps_ that so enraged the Committee, that when the real man came up they black-balled him unanimously.
Lord Arthur was a good deal puzzled at the technical terms used in both books, and had begun to regret that he had not paid more attention to his classics at Oxford, when in the second volume of Erskine, he found a very interesting and complete account of the properties of aconitine, written in fairly clear English.
It seemed to him to be exactly the poison he wanted.
It was swift—indeed, almost immediate, in its effect—perfectly painless, and when taken in the form of a gelatine capsule, the mode recommended by Sir Mathew, not by any means unpalatable.
He accordingly made a note, upon his shirt-cuff, of the amount necessary for a fatal dose, put the books back in their places, and strolled up St. James’s Street, to Pestle and Humbey’s, the great chemists.
Mr. Pestle, who always attended personally on the aristocracy, was a good deal surprised at the order, and in a very deferential manner murmured something about a medical certificate being necessary.
However, as soon as Lord Arthur explained to him that it was for a large Norwegian mastiff that he was obliged to get rid of, as it showed signs of incipient rabies, and had already bitten the coachman twice in the calf of the leg, he expressed himself as being perfectly satisfied, complimented Lord Arthur on his wonderful knowledge of Toxicology, and had the prescription made up immediately.
Lord Arthur put the capsule into a pretty little silver _bonbonnière_ that he saw in a shop window in Bond Street, threw away Pestle and Hambey’s ugly pill-box, and drove off at once to Lady Clementina’s.
‘Well, _monsieur le mauvais sujet_,’ cried the old lady, as he entered the room, ‘why haven’t you been to see me all this time?’  ‘My dear Lady Clem, I never have a moment to myself,’ said Lord Arthur, smiling.
‘I suppose you mean that you go about all day long with Miss Sybil Merton, buying _chiffons_ and talking nonsense?
I cannot understand why people make such a fuss about being married.
In my day we never dreamed of billing and cooing in public, or in private for that matter.’  ‘I assure you I have not seen Sybil for twenty-four hours, Lady Clem.
As far as I can make out, she belongs entirely to her milliners.’  ‘Of course; that is the only reason you come to see an ugly old woman like myself.
I wonder you men don’t take warning.
_On a fait des folies pour moi_, and here I am, a poor rheumatic creature, with a false front and a bad temper.
Why, if it were not for dear Lady Jansen, who sends me all the worst French novels she can find, I don’t think I could get through the day.
Doctors are no use at all, except to get fees out of one.
They can’t even cure my heartburn.’  ‘I have brought you a cure for that, Lady Clem,’ said Lord Arthur gravely.
‘It is a wonderful thing, invented by an American.’  ‘I don’t think I like American inventions, Arthur.
I am quite sure I don’t.
I read some American novels lately, and they were quite nonsensical.’  ‘Oh, but there is no nonsense at all about this, Lady Clem!  I assure you it is a perfect cure.
You must promise to try it’; and Lord Arthur brought the little box out of his pocket, and handed it to her.
‘Well, the box is charming, Arthur.
Is it really a present?
That is very sweet of you.
And is this the wonderful medicine?
It looks like a _bonbon_.
I’ll take it at once.’  ‘Good heavens!  Lady Clem,’ cried Lord Arthur, catching hold of her hand, ‘you mustn’t do anything of the kind.
It is a homoeopathic medicine, and if you take it without having heartburn, it might do you no end of harm.
Wait till you have an attack, and take it then.
You will be astonished at the result.’  ‘I should like to take it now,’ said Lady Clementina, holding up to the light the little transparent capsule, with its floating bubble of liquid aconitine.
I am sure it is delicious.
The fact is that, though I hate doctors, I love medicines.
However, I’ll keep it till my next attack.’  ‘And when will that be?’ asked Lord Arthur eagerly.
‘Will it be soon?’  ‘I hope not for a week.
I had a very bad time yesterday morning with it.
But one never knows.’  ‘You are sure to have one before the end of the month then, Lady Clem?’  ‘I am afraid so.
But how sympathetic you are to-day, Arthur!  Really, Sybil has done you a great deal of good.
And now you must run away, for I am dining with some very dull people, who won’t talk scandal, and I know that if I don’t get my sleep now I shall never be able to keep awake during dinner.
Good-bye, Arthur, give my love to Sybil, and thank you so much for the American medicine.’  ‘You won’t forget to take it, Lady Clem, will you?’ said Lord Arthur, rising from his seat.
‘Of course I won’t, you silly boy.
I think it is most kind of you to think of me, and I shall write and tell you if I want any more.’  Lord Arthur left the house in high spirits, and with a feeling of immense relief.
That night he had an interview with Sybil Merton.
He told her how he had been suddenly placed in a position of terrible difficulty, from which neither honour nor duty would allow him to recede.
He told her that the marriage must be put off for the present, as until he had got rid of his fearful entanglements, he was not a free man.
He implored her to trust him, and not to have any doubts about the future.
Everything would come right, but patience was necessary.
The scene took place in the conservatory of Mr. Merton’s house, in Park Lane, where Lord Arthur had dined as usual.
Sybil had never seemed more happy, and for a moment Lord Arthur had been tempted to play the coward’s part, to write to Lady Clementina for the pill, and to let the marriage go on as if there was no such person as Mr. Podgers in the world.
His better nature, however, soon asserted itself, and even when Sybil flung herself weeping into his arms, he did not falter.
The beauty that stirred his senses had touched his conscience also.
He felt that to wreck so fair a life for the sake of a few months’ pleasure would be a wrong thing to do.
He stayed with Sybil till nearly midnight, comforting her and being comforted in turn, and early the next morning he left for Venice, after writing a manly, firm letter to Mr. Merton about the necessary postponement of the marriage.
IN Venice he met his brother, Lord Surbiton, who happened to have come over from Corfu in his yacht.
The two young men spent a delightful fortnight together.
In the morning they rode on the Lido, or glided up and down the green canals in their long black gondola; in the afternoon they usually entertained visitors on the yacht; and in the evening they dined at Florian’s, and smoked innumerable cigarettes on the Piazza.
Yet somehow Lord Arthur was not happy.
Every day he studied the obituary column in the _Times_, expecting to see a notice of Lady Clementina’s death, but every day he was disappointed.
He began to be afraid that some accident had happened to her, and often regretted that he had prevented her taking the aconitine when she had been so anxious to try its effect.
Sybil’s letters, too, though full of love, and trust, and tenderness, were often very sad in their tone, and sometimes he used to think that he was parted from her for ever.
After a fortnight Lord Surbiton got bored with Venice, and determined to run down the coast to Ravenna, as he heard that there was some capital cock-shooting in the Pinetum.
Lord Arthur at first refused absolutely to come, but Surbiton, of whom he was extremely fond, finally persuaded him that if he stayed at Danieli’s by himself he would be moped to death, and on the morning of the 15th they started, with a strong nor’-east wind blowing, and a rather choppy sea.
The sport was excellent, and the free, open-air life brought the colour back to Lord Arthur’s cheek, but about the 22nd he became anxious about Lady Clementina, and, in spite of Surbiton’s remonstrances, came back to Venice by train.
As he stepped out of his gondola on to the hotel steps, the proprietor came forward to meet him with a sheaf of telegrams.
Lord Arthur snatched them out of his hand, and tore them open.
Everything had been successful.
Lady Clementina had died quite suddenly on the night of the 17th!  His first thought was for Sybil, and he sent her off a telegram announcing his immediate return to London.
He then ordered his valet to pack his things for the night mail, sent his gondoliers about five times their proper fare, and ran up to his sitting-room with a light step and a buoyant heart.
There he found three letters waiting for him.
One was from Sybil herself, full of sympathy and condolence.
The others were from his mother, and from Lady Clementina’s solicitor.
It seemed that the old lady had dined with the Duchess that very night, had delighted every one by her wit and _esprit_, but had gone home somewhat early, complaining of heartburn.
In the morning she was found dead in her bed, having apparently suffered no pain.
Sir Mathew Reid had been sent for at once, but, of course, there was nothing to be done, and she was to be buried on the 22nd at Beauchamp Chalcote.
A few days before she died she had made her will, and left Lord Arthur her little house in Curzon Street, and all her furniture, personal effects, and pictures, with the exception of her collection of miniatures, which was to go to her sister, Lady Margaret Rufford, and her amethyst necklace, which Sybil Merton was to have.
The property was not of much value; but Mr. Mansfield, the solicitor, was extremely anxious for Lord Arthur to return at once, if possible, as there were a great many bills to be paid, and Lady Clementina had never kept any regular accounts.
Lord Arthur was very much touched by Lady Clementina’s kind remembrance of him, and felt that Mr. Podgers had a great deal to answer for.
His love of Sybil, however, dominated every other emotion, and the consciousness that he had done his duty gave him peace and comfort.
When he arrived at Charing Cross, he felt perfectly happy.
The Mertons received him very kindly.
Sybil made him promise that he would never again allow anything to come between them, and the marriage was fixed for the 7th June.
Life seemed to him once more bright and beautiful, and all his old gladness came back to him again.
One day, however, as he was going over the house in Curzon Street, in company with Lady Clementina’s solicitor and Sybil herself, burning packages of faded letters, and turning out drawers of odd rubbish, the young girl suddenly gave a little cry of delight.
‘What have you found, Sybil?’ said Lord Arthur, looking up from his work, and smiling.
‘This lovely little silver _bonbonnière_, Arthur.
Isn’t it quaint and Dutch?
Do give it to me!  I know amethysts won’t become me till I am over eighty.’  It was the box that had held the aconitine.
Lord Arthur started, and a faint blush came into his cheek.
He had almost entirely forgotten what he had done, and it seemed to him a curious coincidence that Sybil, for whose sake he had gone through all that terrible anxiety, should have been the first to remind him of it.
‘Of course you can have it, Sybil.
I gave it to poor Lady Clem myself.’  ‘Oh! thank you, Arthur; and may I have the _bonbon_ too?
I had no notion that Lady Clementina liked sweets.
I thought she was far too intellectual.’  Lord Arthur grew deadly pale, and a horrible idea crossed his mind.
‘_Bonbon_, Sybil?
What do you mean?’ he said in a slow, hoarse voice.
‘There is one in it, that is all.
It looks quite old and dusty, and I have not the slightest intention of eating it.
What is the matter, Arthur?
How white you look!’  Lord Arthur rushed across the room, and seized the box.
Inside it was the amber-coloured capsule, with its poison-bubble.
Lady Clementina had died a natural death after all!  The shock of the discovery was almost too much for him.
He flung the capsule into the fire, and sank on the sofa with a cry of despair.
MR.
Merton was a good deal distressed at the second postponement of the marriage, and Lady Julia, who had already ordered her dress for the wedding, did all in her power to make Sybil break off the match.
Dearly, however, as Sybil loved her mother, she had given her whole life into Lord Arthur’s hands, and nothing that Lady Julia could say could make her waver in her faith.
As for Lord Arthur himself, it took him days to get over his terrible disappointment, and for a time his nerves were completely unstrung.
His excellent common sense, however, soon asserted itself, and his sound, practical mind did not leave him long in doubt about what to do.
Poison having proved a complete failure, dynamite, or some other form of explosive, was obviously the proper thing to try.
He accordingly looked again over the list of his friends and relatives, and, after careful consideration, determined to blow up his uncle, the Dean of Chichester.
The Dean, who was a man of great culture and learning, was extremely fond of clocks, and had a wonderful collection of timepieces, ranging from the fifteenth century to the present day, and it seemed to Lord Arthur that this hobby of the good Dean’s offered him an excellent opportunity for carrying out his scheme.
Where to procure an explosive machine was, of course, quite another matter.
The London Directory gave him no information on the point, and he felt that there was very little use in going to Scotland Yard about it, as they never seemed to know anything about the movements of the dynamite faction till after an explosion had taken place, and not much even then.
Suddenly he thought of his friend Rouvaloff, a young Russian of very revolutionary tendencies, whom he had met at Lady Windermere’s in the winter.
Count Rouvaloff was supposed to be writing a life of Peter the Great, and to have come over to England for the purpose of studying the documents relating to that Tsar’s residence in this country as a ship carpenter; but it was generally suspected that he was a Nihilist agent, and there was no doubt that the Russian Embassy did not look with any favour upon his presence in London.
Lord Arthur felt that he was just the man for his purpose, and drove down one morning to his lodgings in Bloomsbury, to ask his advice and assistance.
‘So you are taking up politics seriously?’ said Count Rouvaloff, when Lord Arthur had told him the object of his mission; but Lord Arthur, who hated swagger of any kind, felt bound to admit to him that he had not the slightest interest in social questions, and simply wanted the explosive machine for a purely family matter, in which no one was concerned but himself.
Count Rouvaloff looked at him for some moments in amazement, and then seeing that he was quite serious, wrote an address on a piece of paper, initialled it, and handed it to him across the table.
‘Scotland Yard would give a good deal to know this address, my dear fellow.’  ‘They shan’t have it,’ cried Lord Arthur, laughing; and after shaking the young Russian warmly by the hand he ran downstairs, examined the paper, and told the coachman to drive to Soho Square.
There he dismissed him, and strolled down Greek Street, till he came to a place called Bayle’s Court.
He passed under the archway, and found himself in a curious _cul-de-sac_, that was apparently occupied by a French Laundry, as a perfect network of clothes-lines was stretched across from house to house, and there was a flutter of white linen in the morning air.
He walked right to the end, and knocked at a little green house.
After some delay, during which every window in the court became a blurred mass of peering faces, the door was opened by a rather rough-looking foreigner, who asked him in very bad English what his business was.
Lord Arthur handed him the paper Count Rouvaloff had given him.
When the man saw it he bowed, and invited Lord Arthur into a very shabby front parlour on the ground floor, and in a few moments Herr Winckelkopf, as he was called in England, bustled into the room, with a very wine-stained napkin round his neck, and a fork in his left hand.
‘Count Rouvaloff has given me an introduction to you,’ said Lord Arthur, bowing, ‘and I am anxious to have a short interview with you on a matter of business.
My name is Smith, Mr. Robert Smith, and I want you to supply me with an explosive clock.’  ‘Charmed to meet you, Lord Arthur,’ said the genial little German, laughing.
‘Don’t look so alarmed, it is my duty to know everybody, and I remember seeing you one evening at Lady Windermere’s.
I hope her ladyship is quite well.
Do you mind sitting with me while I finish my breakfast?
There is an excellent _pâté_, and my friends are kind enough to say that my Rhine wine is better than any they get at the German Embassy,’ and before Lord Arthur had got over his surprise at being recognised, he found himself seated in the back-room, sipping the most delicious Marcobrünner out of a pale yellow hock-glass marked with the Imperial monogram, and chatting in the friendliest manner possible to the famous conspirator.
‘Explosive clocks,’ said Herr Winckelkopf, ‘are not very good things for foreign exportation, as, even if they succeed in passing the Custom House, the train service is so irregular, that they usually go off before they have reached their proper destination.
If, however, you want one for home use, I can supply you with an excellent article, and guarantee that you will he satisfied with the result.
May I ask for whom it is intended?
If it is for the police, or for any one connected with Scotland Yard, I am afraid I cannot do anything for you.
The English detectives are really our best friends, and I have always found that by relying on their stupidity, we can do exactly what we like.
I could not spare one of them.’  ‘I assure you,’ said Lord Arthur, ‘that it has nothing to do with the police at all.
In fact, the clock is intended for the Dean of Chichester.’  ‘Dear me!  I had no idea that you felt so strongly about religion, Lord Arthur.
Few young men do nowadays.’  ‘I am afraid you overrate me, Herr Winckelkopf,’ said Lord Arthur, blushing.
‘The fact is, I really know nothing about theology.’  ‘It is a purely private matter then?’  ‘Purely private.’  Herr Winckelkopf shrugged his shoulders, and left the room, returning in a few minutes with a round cake of dynamite about the size of a penny, and a pretty little French clock, surmounted by an ormolu figure of Liberty trampling on the hydra of Despotism.
Lord Arthur’s face brightened up when he saw it.
‘That is just what I want,’ he cried, ‘and now tell me how it goes off.’  ‘Ah! there is my secret,’ answered Herr Winckelkopf, contemplating his invention with a justifiable look of pride; ‘let me know when you wish it to explode, and I will set the machine to the moment.’  ‘Well, to-day is Tuesday, and if you could send it off at once—’  ‘That is impossible; I have a great deal of important work on hand for some friends of mine in Moscow.
Still, I might send it off to-morrow.’  ‘Oh, it will be quite time enough!’ said Lord Arthur politely, ‘if it is delivered to-morrow night or Thursday morning.
For the moment of the explosion, say Friday at noon exactly.
The Dean is always at home at that hour.’  ‘Friday, at noon,’ repeated Herr Winckelkopf, and he made a note to that effect in a large ledger that was lying on a bureau near the fireplace.
‘And now,’ said Lord Arthur, rising from his seat, ‘pray let me know how much I am in your debt.’  ‘It is such a small matter, Lord Arthur, that I do not care to make any charge.
The dynamite comes to seven and sixpence, the clock will be three pounds ten, and the carriage about five shillings.
I am only too pleased to oblige any friend of Count Rouvaloff’s.’  ‘But your trouble, Herr Winckelkopf?’  ‘Oh, that is nothing!  It is a pleasure to me.
I do not work for money; I live entirely for my art.’  Lord Arthur laid down £4, 2s.
6d.
on the table, thanked the little German for his kindness, and, having succeeded in declining an invitation to meet some Anarchists at a meat-tea on the following Saturday, left the house and went off to the Park.
For the next two days he was in a state of the greatest excitement, and on Friday at twelve o’clock he drove down to the Buckingham to wait for news.
All the afternoon the stolid hall-porter kept posting up telegrams from various parts of the country giving the results of horse-races, the verdicts in divorce suits, the state of the weather, and the like, while the tape ticked out wearisome details about an all-night sitting in the House of Commons, and a small panic on the Stock Exchange.
At four o’clock the evening papers came in, and Lord Arthur disappeared into the library with the _Pall Mall_, the _St. James’s_, the _Globe_, and the _Echo_, to the immense indignation of Colonel Goodchild, who wanted to read the reports of a speech he had delivered that morning at the Mansion House, on the subject of South African Missions, and the advisability of having black Bishops in every province, and for some reason or other had a strong prejudice against the _Evening News_.
None of the papers, however, contained even the slightest allusion to Chichester, and Lord Arthur felt that the attempt must have failed.
It was a terrible blow to him, and for a time he was quite unnerved.
Herr Winckelkopf, whom he went to see the next day was full of elaborate apologies, and offered to supply him with another clock free of charge, or with a case of nitro-glycerine bombs at cost price.
But he had lost all faith in explosives, and Herr Winckelkopf himself acknowledged that everything is so adulterated nowadays, that even dynamite can hardly be got in a pure condition.
The little German, however, while admitting that something must have gone wrong with the machinery, was not without hope that the clock might still go off, and instanced the case of a barometer that he had once sent to the military Governor at Odessa, which, though timed to explode in ten days, had not done so for something like three months.
It was quite true that when it did go off, it merely succeeded in blowing a housemaid to atoms, the Governor having gone out of town six weeks before, but at least it showed that dynamite, as a destructive force, was, when under the control of machinery, a powerful, though a somewhat unpunctual agent.
Lord Arthur was a little consoled by this reflection, but even here he was destined to disappointment, for two days afterwards, as he was going upstairs, the Duchess called him into her boudoir, and showed him a letter she had just received from the Deanery.
‘Jane writes charming letters,’ said the Duchess; ‘you must really read her last.
It is quite as good as the novels Mudie sends us.’  Lord Arthur seized the letter from her hand.
It ran as follows:—                                                    THE DEANERY, CHICHESTER,                                                              27_th_ _May_.
My Dearest Aunt,      Thank you so much for the flannel for the Dorcas Society, and also     for the gingham.
I quite agree with you that it is nonsense their     wanting to wear pretty things, but everybody is so Radical and     irreligious nowadays, that it is difficult to make them see that they     should not try and dress like the upper classes.
I am sure I don’t     know what we are coming to.
As papa has often said in his sermons,     we live in an age of unbelief.
We have had great fun over a clock that an unknown admirer sent papa     last Thursday.
It arrived in a wooden box from London, carriage     paid, and papa feels it must have been sent by some one who had read     his remarkable sermon, ‘Is Licence Liberty?’ for on the top of the     clock was a figure of a woman, with what papa said was the cap of     Liberty on her head.
I didn’t think it very becoming myself, but     papa said it was historical, so I suppose it is all right.
Parker     unpacked it, and papa put it on the mantelpiece in the library, and     we were all sitting there on Friday morning, when just as the clock     struck twelve, we heard a whirring noise, a little puff of smoke came     from the pedestal of the figure, and the goddess of Liberty fell off,     and broke her nose on the fender!  Maria was quite alarmed, but it     looked so ridiculous, that James and I went off into fits of     laughter, and even papa was amused.
When we examined it, we found it     was a sort of alarum clock, and that, if you set it to a particular     hour, and put some gunpowder and a cap under a little hammer, it went     off whenever you wanted.
Papa said it must not remain in the     library, as it made a noise, so Reggie carried it away to the     schoolroom, and does nothing but have small explosions all day long.
Do you think Arthur would like one for a wedding present?
I suppose     they are quite fashionable in London.
Papa says they should do a     great deal of good, as they show that Liberty can’t last, but must     fall down.
Papa says Liberty was invented at the time of the French     Revolution.
How awful it seems!      I have now to go to the Dorcas, where I will read them your most     instructive letter.
How true, dear aunt, your idea is, that in their     rank of life they should wear what is unbecoming.
I must say it is     absurd, their anxiety about dress, when there are so many more     important things in this world, and in the next.
I am so glad your     flowered poplin turned out so well, and that your lace was not torn.
I am wearing my yellow satin, that you so kindly gave me, at the     Bishop’s on Wednesday, and think it will look all right.
Would you     have bows or not?
Jennings says that every one wears bows now, and     that the underskirt should be frilled.
Reggie has just had another     explosion, and papa has ordered the clock to be sent to the stables.
I don’t think papa likes it so much as he did at first, though he is     very flattered at being sent such a pretty and ingenious toy.
It     shows that people read his sermons, and profit by them.
Papa sends his love, in which James, and Reggie, and Maria all unite,     and, hoping that Uncle Cecil’s gout is better, believe me, dear aunt,     ever your affectionate niece,                                                                 JANE PERCY.
_PS._—Do tell me about the bows.
Jennings insists they are the     fashion.
Lord Arthur looked so serious and unhappy over the letter, that the Duchess went into fits of laughter.
‘My dear Arthur,’ she cried, ‘I shall never show you a young lady’s letter again!  But what shall I say about the clock?
I think it is a capital invention, and I should like to have one myself.’  ‘I don’t think much of them,’ said Lord Arthur, with a sad smile, and, after kissing his mother, he left the room.
When he got upstairs, he flung himself on a sofa, and his eyes filled with tears.
He had done his best to commit this murder, but on both occasions he had failed, and through no fault of his own.
He had tried to do his duty, but it seemed as if Destiny herself had turned traitor.
He was oppressed with the sense of the barrenness of good intentions, of the futility of trying to be fine.
Perhaps, it would be better to break off the marriage altogether.
Sybil would suffer, it is true, but suffering could not really mar a nature so noble as hers.
As for himself, what did it matter?
There is always some war in which a man can die, some cause to which a man can give his life, and as life had no pleasure for him, so death had no terror.
Let Destiny work out his doom.
He would not stir to help her.
At half-past seven he dressed, and went down to the club.
Surbiton was there with a party of young men, and he was obliged to dine with them.
Their trivial conversation and idle jests did not interest him, and as soon as coffee was brought he left them, inventing some engagement in order to get away.
As he was going out of the club, the hall-porter handed him a letter.
It was from Herr Winckelkopf, asking him to call down the next evening, and look at an explosive umbrella, that went off as soon as it was opened.
It was the very latest invention, and had just arrived from Geneva.
He tore the letter up into fragments.
He had made up his mind not to try any more experiments.
Then he wandered down to the Thames Embankment, and sat for hours by the river.
The moon peered through a mane of tawny clouds, as if it were a lion’s eye, and innumerable stars spangled the hollow vault, like gold dust powdered on a purple dome.
Now and then a barge swung out into the turbid stream, and floated away with the tide, and the railway signals changed from green to scarlet as the trains ran shrieking across the bridge.
After some time, twelve o’clock boomed from the tall tower at Westminster, and at each stroke of the sonorous bell the night seemed to tremble.
Then the railway lights went out, one solitary lamp left gleaming like a large ruby on a giant mast, and the roar of the city became fainter.
At two o’clock he got up, and strolled towards Blackfriars.
How unreal everything looked!  How like a strange dream!  The houses on the other side of the river seemed built out of darkness.
One would have said that silver and shadow had fashioned the world anew.
The huge dome of St. Paul’s loomed like a bubble through the dusky air.
As he approached Cleopatra’s Needle he saw a man leaning over the parapet, and as he came nearer the man looked up, the gas-light falling full upon his face.
It was Mr. Podgers, the cheiromantist!  No one could mistake the fat, flabby face, the gold-rimmed spectacles, the sickly feeble smile, the sensual mouth.
Lord Arthur stopped.
A brilliant idea flashed across him, and he stole softly up behind.
In a moment he had seized Mr. Podgers by the legs, and flung him into the Thames.
There was a coarse oath, a heavy splash, and all was still.
Lord Arthur looked anxiously over, but could see nothing of the cheiromantist but a tall hat, pirouetting in an eddy of moonlit water.
After a time it also sank, and no trace of Mr. Podgers was visible.
Once he thought that he caught sight of the bulky misshapen figure striking out for the staircase by the bridge, and a horrible feeling of failure came over him, but it turned out to be merely a reflection, and when the moon shone out from behind a cloud it passed away.
At last he seemed to have realised the decree of destiny.
He heaved a deep sigh of relief, and Sybil’s name came to his lips.
‘Have you dropped anything, sir?’ said a voice behind him suddenly.
He turned round, and saw a policeman with a bull’s-eye lantern.
‘Nothing of importance, sergeant,’ he answered, smiling, and hailing a passing hansom, he jumped in, and told the man to drive to Belgrave Square.
For the next few days he alternated between hope and fear.
There were moments when he almost expected Mr. Podgers to walk into the room, and yet at other times he felt that Fate could not be so unjust to him.
Twice he went to the cheiromantist’s address in West Moon Street, but he could not bring himself to ring the bell.
He longed for certainty, and was afraid of it.
Finally it came.
He was sitting in the smoking-room of the club having tea, and listening rather wearily to Surbiton’s account of the last comic song at the Gaiety, when the waiter came in with the evening papers.
He took up the _St. James’s_, and was listlessly turning over its pages, when this strange heading caught his eye:                           SUICIDE OF A CHEIROMANTIST.
He turned pale with excitement, and began to read.
The paragraph ran as follows:      Yesterday morning, at seven o’clock, the body of Mr. Septimus R.
Podgers, the eminent cheiromantist, was washed on shore at Greenwich,     just in front of the Ship Hotel.
The unfortunate gentleman had been     missing for some days, and considerable anxiety for his safety had     been felt in cheiromantic circles.
It is supposed that he committed     suicide under the influence of a temporary mental derangement, caused     by overwork, and a verdict to that effect was returned this afternoon     by the coroner’s jury.
Mr. Podgers had just completed an elaborate     treatise on the subject of the Human Hand, that will shortly be     published, when it will no doubt attract much attention.
The     deceased was sixty-five years of age, and does not seem to have left     any relations.
Lord Arthur rushed out of the club with the paper still in his hand, to the immense amazement of the hall-porter, who tried in vain to stop him, and drove at once to Park Lane.
Sybil saw him from the window, and something told her that he was the bearer of good news.
She ran down to meet him, and, when she saw his face, she knew that all was well.
‘My dear Sybil,’ cried Lord Arthur, ‘let us be married to-morrow!’  ‘You foolish boy!  Why, the cake is not even ordered!’ said Sybil, laughing through her tears.
WHEN the wedding took place, some three weeks later, St. Peter’s was crowded with a perfect mob of smart people.
The service was read in the most impressive manner by the Dean of Chichester, and everybody agreed that they had never seen a handsomer couple than the bride and bridegroom.
They were more than handsome, however—they were happy.
Never for a single moment did Lord Arthur regret all that he had suffered for Sybil’s sake, while she, on her side, gave him the best things a woman can give to any man—worship, tenderness, and love.
For them romance was not killed by reality.
They always felt young.
Some years afterwards, when two beautiful children had been born to them, Lady Windermere came down on a visit to Alton Priory, a lovely old place, that had been the Duke’s wedding present to his son; and one afternoon as she was sitting with Lady Arthur under a lime-tree in the garden, watching the little boy and girl as they played up and down the rose-walk, like fitful sunbeams, she suddenly took her hostess’s hand in hers, and said, ‘Are you happy, Sybil?’  ‘Dear Lady Windermere, of course I am happy.
Aren’t you?’  ‘I have no time to be happy, Sybil.
I always like the last person who is introduced to me; but, as a rule, as soon as I know people I get tired of them.’  ‘Don’t your lions satisfy you, Lady Windermere?’  ‘Oh dear, no! lions are only good for one season.
As soon as their manes are cut, they are the dullest creatures going.
Besides, they behave very badly, if you are really nice to them.
Do you remember that horrid Mr. Podgers?
He was a dreadful impostor.
Of course, I didn’t mind that at all, and even when he wanted to borrow money I forgave him, but I could not stand his making love to me.
He has really made me hate cheiromancy.
I go in for telepathy now.
It is much more amusing.’  ‘You mustn’t say anything against cheiromancy here, Lady Windermere; it is the only subject that Arthur does not like people to chaff about.
I assure you he is quite serious over it.’  ‘You don’t mean to say that he believes in it, Sybil?’  ‘Ask him, Lady Windermere, here he is’; and Lord Arthur came up the garden with a large bunch of yellow roses in his hand, and his two children dancing round him.
‘Lord Arthur?’  ‘Yes, Lady Windermere.’  ‘You don’t mean to say that you believe in cheiromancy?’  ‘Of course I do,’ said the young man, smiling.
‘But why?’  ‘Because I owe to it all the happiness of my life,’ he murmured, throwing himself into a wicker chair.
‘My dear Lord Arthur, what do you owe to it?’  ‘Sybil,’ he answered, handing his wife the roses, and looking into her violet eyes.
‘What nonsense!’ cried Lady Windermere.
‘I never heard such nonsense in all my life.’     THE CANTERVILLE GHOST A HYLO-IDEALISTIC ROMANCE      WHEN Mr. Hiram B.
Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase, every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no doubt at all that the place was haunted.
Indeed, Lord Canterville himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.
‘We have not cared to live in the place ourselves,’ said Lord Canterville, ‘since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of the parish, the Rev.
Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge.
After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often got very little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises that came from the corridor and the library.’  ‘My Lord,’ answered the Minister, ‘I will take the furniture and the ghost at a valuation.
I come from a modern country, where we have everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actresses and prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in Europe, we’d have it at home in a very short time in one of our public museums, or on the road as a show.’  ‘I fear that the ghost exists,’ said Lord Canterville, smiling, ‘though it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios.
It has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family.’  ‘Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville.
But there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy.’  ‘You are certainly very natural in America,’ answered Lord Canterville, who did not quite understand Mr. Otis’s last observation, ‘and if you don’t mind a ghost in the house, it is all right.
Only you must remember I warned you.’  A few weeks after this, the purchase was completed, and at the close of the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.
Mrs.
Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R.
Tappan, of West 53rd Street, had been a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman, with fine eyes, and a superb profile.
Many American ladies on leaving their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs.
Otis had never fallen into this error.
She had a magnificent constitution, and a really wonderful amount of animal spirits.
Indeed, in many respects, she was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of course, language.
Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an excellent dancer.
Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.
Otherwise he was extremely sensible.
Miss Virginia E.
Otis was a little girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom in her large blue eyes.
She was a wonderful amazon, and had once raced old Lord Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length and a half, just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was sent back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.
After Virginia came the twins, who were usually called ‘The Stars and Stripes,’ as they were always getting swished.
They were delightful boys, and with the exception of the worthy Minister the only true republicans of the family.
As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and they started on their drive in high spirits.
It was a lovely July evening, and the air was delicate with the scent of the pine-woods.
Now and then they heard a wood pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.
Little squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by, and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy knolls, with their white tails in the air.
As they entered the avenue of Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they reached the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.
Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed in black silk, with a white cap and apron.
This was Mrs.
Umney, the housekeeper, whom Mrs.
Otis, at Lady Canterville’s earnest request, had consented to keep on in her former position.
She made them each a low curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner, ‘I bid you welcome to Canterville Chase.’  Following her, they passed through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained-glass window.
Here they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps, they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs.
Umney waited on them.
Suddenly Mrs.
Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by the fireplace and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said to Mrs.
Umney, ‘I am afraid something has been spilt there.’  ‘Yes, madam,’ replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, ‘blood has been spilt on that spot.’  ‘How horrid,’ cried Mrs.
Otis; ‘I don’t at all care for blood-stains in a sitting-room.
It must be removed at once.’  The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice, ‘It is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on that very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.
Sir Simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very mysterious circumstances.
His body has never been discovered, but his guilty spirit still haunts the Chase.
The blood-stain has been much admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed.’  ‘That is all nonsense,’ cried Washington Otis; ‘Pinkerton’s Champion Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no time,’ and before the terrified housekeeper could interfere he had fallen upon his knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what looked like a black cosmetic.
In a few moments no trace of the blood-stain could be seen.
‘I knew Pinkerton would do it,’ he exclaimed triumphantly, as he looked round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these words than a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a fearful peal of thunder made them all start to their feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainted.
‘What a monstrous climate!’ said the American Minister calmly, as he lit a long cheroot.
‘I guess the old country is so overpopulated that they have not enough decent weather for everybody.
I have always been of opinion that emigration is the only thing for England.’  ‘My dear Hiram,’ cried Mrs.
Otis, ‘what can we do with a woman who faints?’  ‘Charge it to her like breakages,’ answered the Minister; ‘she won’t faint after that’; and in a few moments Mrs.
Umney certainly came to.
There was no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she sternly warned Mr. Otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.
‘I have seen things with my own eyes, sir,’ she said, ‘that would make any Christian’s hair stand on end, and many and many a night I have not closed my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here.’  Mr. Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they were not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of Providence on her new master and mistress, and making arrangements for an increase of salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.
THE storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note occurred.
The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast, they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor.
‘I don’t think it can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent,’ said Washington, ‘for I have tried it with everything.
It must be the ghost.’  He accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, but the second morning it appeared again.
The third morning also it was there, though the library had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis himself, and the key carried upstairs.
The whole family were now quite interested; Mr. Otis began to suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his denial of the existence of ghosts, Mrs.
Otis expressed her intention of joining the Psychical Society, and Washington prepared a long letter to Messrs.
Myers and Podmore on the subject of the Permanence of Sanguineous Stains when connected with Crime.
That night all doubts about the objective existence of phantasmata were removed for ever.
The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the whole family went out for a drive.
They did not return home till nine o’clock, when they had a light supper.
The conversation in no way turned upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of receptive expectation which so often precede the presentation of psychical phenomena.
The subjects discussed, as I have since learned from Mr. Otis, were merely such as form the ordinary conversation of cultured Americans of the better class, such as the immense superiority of Miss Fanny Davenport over Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in the best English houses; the importance of Boston in the development of the world-soul; the advantages of the baggage check system in railway travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as compared to the London drawl.
No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way.
At eleven o’clock the family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out.
Some time after, Mr. Otis was awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside his room.
It sounded like the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming nearer every moment.
He got up at once, struck a match, and looked at the time.
It was exactly one o’clock.
He was quite calm, and felt his pulse, which was not at all feverish.
The strange noise still continued, and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps.
He put on his slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, and opened the door.
Right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man of terrible aspect.
His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair fell over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which were of antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung heavy manacles and rusty gyves.
‘My dear sir,’ said Mr. Otis, ‘I really must insist on your oiling those chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator.
It is said to be completely efficacious upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect on the wrapper from some of our most eminent native divines.
I shall leave it here for you by the bedroom candles, and will be happy to supply you with more should you require it.’  With these words the United States Minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and, closing his door, retired to rest.
For a moment the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor, he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a ghastly green light.
Just, however, as he reached the top of the great oak staircase, a door was flung open, two little white-robed figures appeared, and a large pillow whizzed past his head!  There was evidently no time to be lost, so, hastily adopting the Fourth Dimension of Space as a means of escape, he vanished through the wainscoting, and the house became quite quiet.
On reaching a small secret chamber in the left wing, he leaned up against a moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realise his position.
Never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three hundred years, had he been so grossly insulted.
He thought of the Dowager Duchess, whom he had frightened into a fit as she stood before the glass in her lace and diamonds; of the four housemaids, who had gone off into hysterics when he merely grinned at them through the curtains of one of the spare bedrooms; of the rector of the parish, whose candle he had blown out as he was coming late one night from the library, and who had been under the care of Sir William Gull ever since, a perfect martyr to nervous disorders; and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who, having wakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an arm-chair by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed for six weeks with an attack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become reconciled to the Church, and broken off her connection with that notorious sceptic Monsieur de Voltaire.
He remembered the terrible night when the wicked Lord Canterville was found choking in his dressing-room, with the knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and confessed, just before he died, that he had cheated Charles James Fox out of £50,000 at Crockford’s by means of that very card, and swore that the ghost had made him swallow it.
All his great achievements came back to him again, from the butler who had shot himself in the pantry because he had seen a green hand tapping at the window pane, to the beautiful Lady Stutfield, who was always obliged to wear a black velvet band round her throat to hide the mark of five fingers burnt upon her white skin, and who drowned herself at last in the carp-pond at the end of the King’s Walk.
With the enthusiastic egotism of the true artist he went over his most celebrated performances, and smiled bitterly to himself as he recalled to mind his last appearance as ‘Red Ruben, or the Strangled Babe,’ his _début_ as ‘Gaunt Gibeon, the Blood-sucker of Bexley Moor,’ and the _furore_ he had excited one lovely June evening by merely playing ninepins with his own bones upon the lawn-tennis ground.
And after all this, some wretched modern Americans were to come and offer him the Rising Sun Lubricator, and throw pillows at his head!  It was quite unbearable.
Besides, no ghosts in history had ever been treated in this manner.
Accordingly, he determined to have vengeance, and remained till daylight in an attitude of deep thought.
THE next morning when the Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed the ghost at some length.
The United States Minister was naturally a little annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted.
‘I have no wish,’ he said, ‘to do the ghost any personal injury, and I must say that, considering the length of time he has been in the house, I don’t think it is at all polite to throw pillows at him’—a very just remark, at which, I am sorry to say, the twins burst into shouts of laughter.
‘Upon the other hand,’ he continued, ‘if he really declines to use the Rising Sun Lubricator, we shall have to take his chains from him.
It would be quite impossible to sleep, with such a noise going on outside the bedrooms.’  For the rest of the week, however, they were undisturbed, the only thing that excited any attention being the continual renewal of the blood-stain on the library floor.
This certainly was very strange, as the door was always locked at night by Mr. Otis, and the windows kept closely barred.
The chameleon-like colour, also, of the stain excited a good deal of comment.
Some mornings it was a dull (almost Indian) red, then it would be vermilion, then a rich purple, and once when they came down for family prayers, according to the simple rites of the Free American Reformed Episcopalian Church, they found it a bright emerald-green.
These kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused the party very much, and bets on the subject were freely made every evening.
The only person who did not enter into the joke was little Virginia, who, for some unexplained reason, was always a good deal distressed at the sight of the blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was emerald-green.
The second appearance of the ghost was on Sunday night.
Shortly after they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in the hall.
Rushing downstairs, they found that a large suit of old armour had become detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone floor, while, seated in a high-backed chair, was the Canterville ghost, rubbing his knees with an expression of acute agony on his face.
The twins, having brought their pea-shooters with them, at once discharged two pellets on him, with that accuracy of aim which can only be attained by long and careful practice on a writing-master, while the United States Minister covered him with his revolver, and called upon him, in accordance with Californian etiquette, to hold up his hands!  The ghost started up with a wild shriek of rage, and swept through them like a mist, extinguishing Washington Otis’s candle as he passed, and so leaving them all in total darkness.
On reaching the top of the staircase he recovered himself, and determined to give his celebrated peal of demoniac laughter.
This he had on more than one occasion found extremely useful.
It was said to have turned Lord Raker’s wig grey in a single night, and had certainly made three of Lady Canterville’s French governesses give warning before their month was up.
He accordingly laughed his most horrible laugh, till the old vaulted roof rang and rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo died away when a door opened, and Mrs.
Otis came out in a light blue dressing-gown.
‘I am afraid you are far from well,’ she said, ‘and have brought you a bottle of Dr. Dobell’s tincture.
If it is indigestion, you will find it a most excellent remedy.’  The ghost glared at her in fury, and began at once to make preparations for turning himself into a large black dog, an accomplishment for which he was justly renowned, and to which the family doctor always attributed the permanent idiocy of Lord Canterville’s uncle, the Hon.
Thomas Horton.
The sound of approaching footsteps, however, made him hesitate in his fell purpose, so he contented himself with becoming faintly phosphorescent, and vanished with a deep churchyard groan, just as the twins had come up to him.
On reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to the most violent agitation.
The vulgarity of the twins, and the gross materialism of Mrs.
Otis, were naturally extremely annoying, but what really distressed him most was, that he had been unable to wear the suit of mail.
He had hoped that even modern Americans would be thrilled by the sight of a Spectre In Armour, if for no more sensible reason, at least out of respect for their national poet Longfellow, over whose graceful and attractive poetry he himself had whiled away many a weary hour when the Cantervilles were up in town.
Besides, it was his own suit.
He had worn it with great success at the Kenilworth tournament, and had been highly complimented on it by no less a person than the Virgin Queen herself.
Yet when he had put it on, he had been completely overpowered by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque, and had fallen heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees severely, and bruising the knuckles of his right hand.
For some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardly stirred out of his room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper repair.
However, by taking great care of himself, he recovered, and resolved to make a third attempt to frighten the United States Minister and his family.
He selected Friday, the 17th of August, for his appearance, and spent most of that day in looking over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding in favour of a large slouched hat with a red feather, a winding-sheet frilled at the wrists and neck, and a rusty dagger.
Towards evening a violent storm of rain came on, and the wind was so high that all the windows and doors in the old house shook and rattled.
In fact, it was just such weather as he loved.
His plan of action was this.
He was to make his way quietly to Washington Otis’s room, gibber at him from the foot of the bed, and stab himself three times in the throat to the sound of slow music.
He bore Washington a special grudge, being quite aware that it was he who was in the habit of removing the famous Canterville blood-stain, by means of Pinkerton’s Paragon Detergent.
Having reduced the reckless and foolhardy youth to a condition of abject terror, he was then to proceed to the room occupied by the United States Minister and his wife, and there to place a clammy hand on Mrs.
Otis’s forehead, while he hissed into her trembling husband’s ear the awful secrets of the charnel-house.
With regard to little Virginia, he had not quite made up his mind.
She had never insulted him in any way, and was pretty and gentle.
A few hollow groans from the wardrobe, he thought, would be more than sufficient, or, if that failed to wake her, he might grabble at the counterpane with palsy-twitching fingers.
As for the twins, he was quite determined to teach them a lesson.
The first thing to be done was, of course, to sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling sensation of nightmare.
Then, as their beds were quite close to each other, to stand between them in the form of a green, icy-cold corpse, till they became paralysed with fear, and finally, to throw off the winding-sheet, and crawl round the room, with white bleached bones and one rolling eye-ball, in the character of ‘Dumb Daniel, or the Suicide’s Skeleton,’ a _rôle_ in which he had on more than one occasion produced a great effect, and which he considered quite equal to his famous part of ‘Martin the Maniac, or the Masked Mystery.’  At half-past ten he heard the family going to bed.
For some time he was disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, who, with the light-hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing themselves before they retired to rest, but at a quarter past eleven all was still, and, as midnight sounded, he sallied forth.
The owl beat against the window panes, the raven croaked from the old yew-tree, and the wind wandered moaning round the house like a lost soul; but the Otis family slept unconscious of their doom, and high above the rain and storm he could hear the steady snoring of the Minister for the United States.
He stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil smile on his cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the moon hid her face in a cloud as he stole past the great oriel window, where his own arms and those of his murdered wife were blazoned in azure and gold.
On and on he glided, like an evil shadow, the very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed.
Once he thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only the baying of a dog from the Red Farm, and he went on, muttering strange sixteenth-century curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty dagger in the midnight air.
Finally he reached the corner of the passage that led to luckless Washington’s room.
For a moment he paused there, the wind blowing his long grey locks about his head, and twisting into grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless horror of the dead man’s shroud.
Then the clock struck the quarter, and he felt the time was come.
He chuckled to himself, and turned the corner; but no sooner had he done so, than, with a piteous wail of terror, he fell back, and hid his blanched face in his long, bony hands.
Right in front of him was standing a horrible spectre, motionless as a carven image, and monstrous as a madman’s dream!  Its head was bald and burnished; its face round, and fat, and white; and hideous laughter seemed to have writhed its features into an eternal grin.
From the eyes streamed rays of scarlet light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a hideous garment, like to his own, swathed with its silent snows the Titan form.
On its breast was a placard with strange writing in antique characters, some scroll of shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful calendar of crime, and, with its right hand, it bore aloft a falchion of gleaming steel.
Never having seen a ghost before, he naturally was terribly frightened, and, after a second hasty glance at the awful phantom, he fled back to his room, tripping up in his long winding-sheet as he sped down the corridor, and finally dropping the rusty dagger into the Minister’s jack-boots, where it was found in the morning by the butler.
Once in the privacy of his own apartment, he flung himself down on a small pallet-bed, and hid his face under the clothes.
After a time, however, the brave old Canterville spirit asserted itself, and he determined to go and speak to the other ghost as soon as it was daylight.
Accordingly, just as the dawn was touching the hills with silver, he returned towards the spot where he had first laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling that, after all, two ghosts were better than one, and that, by the aid of his new friend, he might safely grapple with the twins.
On reaching the spot, however, a terrible sight met his gaze.
Something had evidently happened to the spectre, for the light had entirely faded from its hollow eyes, the gleaming falchion had fallen from its hand, and it was leaning up against the wall in a strained and uncomfortable attitude.
He rushed forward and seized it in his arms, when, to his horror, the head slipped off and rolled on the floor, the body assumed a recumbent posture, and he found himself clasping a white dimity bed-curtain, with a sweeping-brush, a kitchen cleaver, and a hollow turnip lying at his feet!  Unable to understand this curious transformation, he clutched the placard with feverish haste, and there, in the grey morning light, he read these fearful words:—                                  YE OLDE GHOSTE                        Ye Onlie True and Originale Spook.
Beware of Ye Imitationes.
All others are Counterfeite.
The whole thing flashed across him.
He had been tricked, foiled, and outwitted!  The old Canterville look came into his eyes; he ground his toothless gums together; and, raising his withered hands high above his head, swore, according to the picturesque phraseology of the antique school, that when Chanticleer had sounded twice his merry horn, deeds of blood would be wrought, and Murder walk abroad with silent feet.
Hardly had he finished this awful oath when, from the red-tiled roof of a distant homestead, a cock crew.
He laughed a long, low, bitter laugh, and waited.
Hour after hour he waited, but the cock, for some strange reason, did not crow again.
Finally, at half-past seven, the arrival of the housemaids made him give up his fearful vigil, and he stalked back to his room, thinking of his vain hope and baffled purpose.
There he consulted several books of ancient chivalry, of which he was exceedingly fond, and found that, on every occasion on which his oath had been used, Chanticleer had always crowed a second time.
‘Perdition seize the naughty fowl,’ he muttered, ‘I have seen the day when, with my stout spear, I would have run him through the gorge, and made him crow for me an ’twere in death!’  He then retired to a comfortable lead coffin, and stayed there till evening.
THE next day the ghost was very weak and tired.
The terrible excitement of the last four weeks was beginning to have its effect.
His nerves were completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise.
For five days he kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point of the blood-stain on the library floor.
If the Otis family did not want it, they clearly did not deserve it.
They were evidently people on a low, material plane of existence, and quite incapable of appreciating the symbolic value of sensuous phenomena.
The question of phantasmic apparitions, and the development of astral bodies, was of course quite a different matter, and really not under his control.
It was his solemn duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to gibber from the large oriel window on the first and third Wednesday in every month, and he did not see how he could honourably escape from his obligations.
It is quite true that his life had been very evil, but, upon the other hand, he was most conscientious in all things connected with the supernatural.
For the next three Saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as usual between midnight and three o’clock, taking every possible precaution against being either heard or seen.
He removed his boots, trod as lightly as possible on the old worm-eaten boards, wore a large black velvet cloak, and was careful to use the Rising Sun Lubricator for oiling his chains.
I am bound to acknowledge that it was with a good deal of difficulty that he brought himself to adopt this last mode of protection.
However, one night, while the family were at dinner, he slipped into Mr. Otis’s bedroom and carried off the bottle.
He felt a little humiliated at first, but afterwards was sensible enough to see that there was a great deal to be said for the invention, and, to a certain degree, it served his purpose.
Still, in spite of everything, he was not left unmolested.
Strings were continually being stretched across the corridor, over which he tripped in the dark, and on one occasion, while dressed for the part of ‘Black Isaac, or the Huntsman of Hogley Woods,’ he met with a severe fall, through treading on a butter-slide, which the twins had constructed from the entrance of the Tapestry Chamber to the top of the oak staircase.
This last insult so enraged him, that he resolved to make one final effort to assert his dignity and social position, and determined to visit the insolent young Etonians the next night in his celebrated character of ‘Reckless Rupert, or the Headless Earl.’  He had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in fact, not since he had so frightened pretty Lady Barbara Modish by means of it, that she suddenly broke off her engagement with the present Lord Canterville’s grandfather, and ran away to Gretna Green with handsome Jack Castleton, declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to marry into a family that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and down the terrace at twilight.
Poor Jack was afterwards shot in a duel by Lord Canterville on Wandsworth Common, and Lady Barbara died of a broken heart at Tunbridge Wells before the year was out, so, in every way, it had been a great success.
It was, however, an extremely difficult ‘make-up,’ if I may use such a theatrical expression in connection with one of the greatest mysteries of the supernatural, or, to employ a more scientific term, the higher-natural world, and it took him fully three hours to make his preparations.
At last everything was ready, and he was very pleased with his appearance.
The big leather riding-boots that went with the dress were just a little too large for him, and he could only find one of the two horse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite satisfied, and at a quarter past one he glided out of the wainscoting and crept down the corridor.
On reaching the room occupied by the twins, which I should mention was called the Blue Bed Chamber, on account of the colour of its hangings, he found the door just ajar.
Wishing to make an effective entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water fell right down on him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his left shoulder by a couple of inches.
At the same moment he heard stifled shrieks of laughter proceeding from the four-post bed.
The shock to his nervous system was so great that he fled back to his room as hard as he could go, and the next day he was laid up with a severe cold.
The only thing that at all consoled him in the whole affair was the fact that he had not brought his head with him, for, had he done so, the consequences might have been very serious.
He now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude American family, and contented himself, as a rule, with creeping about the passages in list slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of draughts, and a small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the twins.
The final blow he received occurred on the 19th of September.
He had gone downstairs to the great entrance-hall, feeling sure that there, at any rate, he would be quite unmolested, and was amusing himself by making satirical remarks on the large Saroni photographs of the United States Minister and his wife, which had now taken the place of the Canterville family pictures.
He was simply but neatly clad in a long shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaw with a strip of yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton’s spade.
In fact, he was dressed for the character of ‘Jonas the Graveless, or the Corpse-Snatcher of Chertsey Barn,’ one of his most remarkable impersonations, and one which the Cantervilles had every reason to remember, as it was the real origin of their quarrel with their neighbour, Lord Rufford.
It was about a quarter past two o’clock in the morning, and, as far as he could ascertain, no one was stirring.
As he was strolling towards the library, however, to see if there were any traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on him from a dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly above their heads, and shrieked out ‘BOO!’ in his ear.
Seized with a panic, which, under the circumstances, was only natural, he rushed for the staircase, but found Washington Otis waiting for him there with the big garden-syringe; and being thus hemmed in by his enemies on every side, and driven almost to bay, he vanished into the great iron stove, which, fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to make his way home through the flues and chimneys, arriving at his own room in a terrible state of dirt, disorder, and despair.
After this he was not seen again on any nocturnal expedition.
The twins lay in wait for him on several occasions, and strewed the passages with nutshells every night to the great annoyance of their parents and the servants, but it was of no avail.
It was quite evident that his feelings were so wounded that he would not appear.
Mr. Otis consequently resumed his great work on the history of the Democratic Party, on which he had been engaged for some years; Mrs.
Otis organised a wonderful clam-bake, which amazed the whole county; the boys took to lacrosse, euchre, poker, and other American national games; and Virginia rode about the lanes on her pony, accompanied by the young Duke of Cheshire, who had come to spend the last week of his holidays at Canterville Chase.
It was generally assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, in fact, Mr. Otis wrote a letter to that effect to Lord Canterville, who, in reply, expressed his great pleasure at the news, and sent his best congratulations to the Minister’s worthy wife.
The Otises, however, were deceived, for the ghost was still in the house, and though now almost an invalid, was by no means ready to let matters rest, particularly as he heard that among the guests was the young Duke of Cheshire, whose grand-uncle, Lord Francis Stilton, had once bet a hundred guineas with Colonel Carbury that he would play dice with the Canterville ghost, and was found the next morning lying on the floor of the card-room in such a helpless paralytic state, that though he lived on to a great age, he was never able to say anything again but ‘Double Sixes.’  The story was well known at the time, though, of course, out of respect to the feelings of the two noble families, every attempt was made to hush it up; and a full account of all the circumstances connected with it will be found in the third volume of Lord Tattle’s _Recollections of the Prince Regent and his Friends_.
The ghost, then, was naturally very anxious to show that he had not lost his influence over the Stiltons, with whom, indeed, he was distantly connected, his own first cousin having been married _en secondes noces_ to the Sieur de Bulkeley, from whom, as every one knows, the Dukes of Cheshire are lineally descended.
Accordingly, he made arrangements for appearing to Virginia’s little lover in his celebrated impersonation of ‘The Vampire Monk, or, the Bloodless Benedictine,’ a performance so horrible that when old Lady Startup saw it, which she did on one fatal New Year’s Eve, in the year 1764, she went off into the most piercing shrieks, which culminated in violent apoplexy, and died in three days, after disinheriting the Cantervilles, who were her nearest relations, and leaving all her money to her London apothecary.
At the last moment, however, his terror of the twins prevented his leaving his room, and the little Duke slept in peace under the great feathered canopy in the Royal Bedchamber, and dreamed of Virginia.
A FEW days after this, Virginia and her curly-haired cavalier went out riding on Brockley meadows, where she tore her habit so badly in getting through a hedge, that, on her return home, she made up her mind to go up by the back staircase so as not to be seen.
As she was running past the Tapestry Chamber, the door of which happened to be open, she fancied she saw some one inside, and thinking it was her mother’s maid, who sometimes used to bring her work there, looked in to ask her to mend her habit.
To her immense surprise, however, it was the Canterville Ghost himself!  He was sitting by the window, watching the ruined gold of the yellowing trees fly through the air, and the red leaves dancing madly down the long avenue.
His head was leaning on his hand, and his whole attitude was one of extreme depression.
Indeed, so forlorn, and so much out of repair did he look, that little Virginia, whose first idea had been to run away and lock herself in her room, was filled with pity, and determined to try and comfort him.
So light was her footfall, and so deep his melancholy, that he was not aware of her presence till she spoke to him.
‘I am so sorry for you,’ she said, ‘but my brothers are going back to Eton to-morrow, and then, if you behave yourself, no one will annoy you.’  ‘It is absurd asking me to behave myself,’ he answered, looking round in astonishment at the pretty little girl who had ventured to address him, ‘quite absurd.
I must rattle my chains, and groan through keyholes, and walk about at night, if that is what you mean.
It is my only reason for existing.’  ‘It is no reason at all for existing, and you know you have been very wicked.
Mrs.
Umney told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had killed your wife.’  ‘Well, I quite admit it,’ said the Ghost petulantly, ‘but it was a purely family matter, and concerned no one else.’  ‘It is very wrong to kill any one,’ said Virginia, who at times had a sweet Puritan gravity, caught from some old New England ancestor.
‘Oh, I hate the cheap severity of abstract ethics!  My wife was very plain, never had my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing about cookery.
Why, there was a buck I had shot in Hogley Woods, a magnificent pricket, and do you know how she had it sent up to table?
However, it is no matter now, for it is all over, and I don’t think it was very nice of her brothers to starve me to death, though I did kill her.’  ‘Starve you to death?
Oh, Mr. Ghost, I mean Sir Simon, are you hungry?
I have a sandwich in my case.
Would you like it?’  ‘No, thank you, I never eat anything now; but it is very kind of you, all the same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your horrid, rude, vulgar, dishonest family.’  ‘Stop!’ cried Virginia, stamping her foot, ‘it is you who are rude, and horrid, and vulgar, and as for dishonesty, you know you stole the paints out of my box to try and furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain in the library.
First you took all my reds, including the vermilion, and I couldn’t do any more sunsets, then you took the emerald-green and the chrome-yellow, and finally I had nothing left but indigo and Chinese white, and could only do moonlight scenes, which are always depressing to look at, and not at all easy to paint.
I never told on you, though I was very much annoyed, and it was most ridiculous, the whole thing; for who ever heard of emerald-green blood?’  ‘Well, really,’ said the Ghost, rather meekly, ‘what was I to do?
It is a very difficult thing to get real blood nowadays, and, as your brother began it all with his Paragon Detergent, I certainly saw no reason why I should not have your paints.
As for colour, that is always a matter of taste: the Cantervilles have blue blood, for instance, the very bluest in England; but I know you Americans don’t care for things of this kind.’  ‘You know nothing about it, and the best thing you can do is to emigrate and improve your mind.
My father will be only too happy to give you a free passage, and though there is a heavy duty on spirits of every kind, there will be no difficulty about the Custom House, as the officers are all Democrats.
Once in New York, you are sure to be a great success.
I know lots of people there who would give a hundred thousand dollars to have a grandfather, and much more than that to have a family Ghost.’  ‘I don’t think I should like America.’  ‘I suppose because we have no ruins and no curiosities,’ said Virginia satirically.
‘No ruins! no curiosities!’ answered the Ghost; ‘you have your navy and your manners.’  ‘Good evening; I will go and ask papa to get the twins an extra week’s holiday.’  ‘Please don’t go, Miss Virginia,’ he cried; ‘I am so lonely and so unhappy, and I really don’t know what to do.
I want to go to sleep and I cannot.’  ‘That’s quite absurd!  You have merely to go to bed and blow out the candle.
It is very difficult sometimes to keep awake, especially at church, but there is no difficulty at all about sleeping.
Why, even babies know how to do that, and they are not very clever.’  ‘I have not slept for three hundred years,’ he said sadly, and Virginia’s beautiful blue eyes opened in wonder; ‘for three hundred years I have not slept, and I am so tired.’  Virginia grew quite grave, and her little lips trembled like rose-leaves.
She came towards him, and kneeling down at his side, looked up into his old withered face.
‘Poor, poor Ghost,’ she murmured; ‘have you no place where you can sleep?’  ‘Far away beyond the pine-woods,’ he answered, in a low dreamy voice, ‘there is a little garden.
There the grass grows long and deep, there are the great white stars of the hemlock flower, there the nightingale sings all night long.
All night long he sings, and the cold, crystal moon looks down, and the yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over the sleepers.’  Virginia’s eyes grew dim with tears, and she hid her face in her hands.
‘You mean the Garden of Death,’ she whispered.
‘Yes, Death.
Death must be so beautiful.
To lie in the soft brown earth, with the grasses waving above one’s head, and listen to silence.
To have no yesterday, and no to-morrow.
To forget time, to forgive life, to be at peace.
You can help me.
You can open for me the portals of Death’s house, for Love is always with you, and Love is stronger than Death is.’  Virginia trembled, a cold shudder ran through her, and for a few moments there was silence.
She felt as if she was in a terrible dream.
Then the Ghost spoke again, and his voice sounded like the sighing of the wind.
‘Have you ever read the old prophecy on the library window?’  ‘Oh, often,’ cried the little girl, looking up; ‘I know it quite well.
It is painted in curious black letters, and it is difficult to read.
There are only six lines:      When a golden girl can win     Prayer from out the lips of sin,     When the barren almond bears,     And a little child gives away its tears,     Then shall all the house be still     And peace come to Canterville.
But I don’t know what they mean.’  ‘They mean,’ he said sadly, ‘that you must weep for me for my sins, because I have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, because I have no faith, and then, if you have always been sweet, and good, and gentle, the Angel of Death will have mercy on me.
You will see fearful shapes in darkness, and wicked voices will whisper in your ear, but they will not harm you, for against the purity of a little child the powers of Hell cannot prevail.’  Virginia made no answer, and the Ghost wrung his hands in wild despair as he looked down at her bowed golden head.
Suddenly she stood up, very pale, and with a strange light in her eyes.
‘I am not afraid,’ she said firmly, ‘and I will ask the Angel to have mercy on you.’  He rose from his seat with a faint cry of joy, and taking her hand bent over it with old-fashioned grace and kissed it.
His fingers were as cold as ice, and his lips burned like fire, but Virginia did not falter, as he led her across the dusky room.
On the faded green tapestry were broidered little huntsmen.
They blew their tasselled horns and with their tiny hands waved to her to go back.
‘Go back! little Virginia,’ they cried, ‘go back!’ but the Ghost clutched her hand more tightly, and she shut her eyes against them.
Horrible animals with lizard tails, and goggle eyes, blinked at her from the carven chimney-piece, and murmured ‘Beware! little Virginia, beware! we may never see you again,’ but the Ghost glided on more swiftly, and Virginia did not listen.
When they reached the end of the room he stopped, and muttered some words she could not understand.
She opened her eyes, and saw the wall slowly fading away like a mist, and a great black cavern in front of her.
A bitter cold wind swept round them, and she felt something pulling at her dress.
‘Quick, quick,’ cried the Ghost, ‘or it will be too late,’ and, in a moment, the wainscoting had closed behind them, and the Tapestry Chamber was empty.
ABOUT ten minutes later, the bell rang for tea, and, as Virginia did not come down, Mrs.
Otis sent up one of the footmen to tell her.
After a little time he returned and said that he could not find Miss Virginia anywhere.
As she was in the habit of going out to the garden every evening to get flowers for the dinner-table, Mrs.
Otis was not at all alarmed at first, but when six o’clock struck, and Virginia did not appear, she became really agitated, and sent the boys out to look for her, while she herself and Mr. Otis searched every room in the house.
At half-past six the boys came back and said that they could find no trace of their sister anywhere.
They were all now in the greatest state of excitement, and did not know what to do, when Mr. Otis suddenly remembered that, some few days before, he had given a band of gypsies permission to camp in the park.
He accordingly at once set off for Blackfell Hollow, where he knew they were, accompanied by his eldest son and two of the farm-servants.
The little Duke of Cheshire, who was perfectly frantic with anxiety, begged hard to be allowed to go too, but Mr. Otis would not allow him, as he was afraid there might be a scuffle.
On arriving at the spot, however, he found that the gypsies had gone, and it was evident that their departure had been rather sudden, as the fire was still burning, and some plates were lying on the grass.
Having sent off Washington and the two men to scour the district, he ran home, and despatched telegrams to all the police inspectors in the county, telling them to look out for a little girl who had been kidnapped by tramps or gypsies.
He then ordered his horse to be brought round, and, after insisting on his wife and the three boys sitting down to dinner, rode off down the Ascot Road with a groom.
He had hardly, however, gone a couple of miles when he heard somebody galloping after him, and, looking round, saw the little Duke coming up on his pony, with his face very flushed and no hat.
‘I’m awfully sorry, Mr. Otis,’ gasped out the boy, ‘but I can’t eat any dinner as long as Virginia is lost.
Please, don’t be angry with me; if you had let us be engaged last year, there would never have been all this trouble.
You won’t send me back, will you?
I can’t go!  I won’t go!’  The Minister could not help smiling at the handsome young scapegrace, and was a good deal touched at his devotion to Virginia, so leaning down from his horse, he patted him kindly on the shoulders, and said, ‘Well, Cecil, if you won’t go back I suppose you must come with me, but I must get you a hat at Ascot.’  ‘Oh, bother my hat!  I want Virginia!’ cried the little Duke, laughing, and they galloped on to the railway station.
There Mr. Otis inquired of the station-master if any one answering the description of Virginia had been seen on the platform, but could get no news of her.
The station-master, however, wired up and down the line, and assured him that a strict watch would be kept for her, and, after having bought a hat for the little Duke from a linen-draper, who was just putting up his shutters, Mr. Otis rode off to Bexley, a village about four miles away, which he was told was a well-known haunt of the gypsies, as there was a large common next to it.
Here they roused up the rural policeman, but could get no information from him, and, after riding all over the common, they turned their horses’ heads homewards, and reached the Chase about eleven o’clock, dead-tired and almost heart-broken.
They found Washington and the twins waiting for them at the gate-house with lanterns, as the avenue was very dark.
Not the slightest trace of Virginia had been discovered.
The gypsies had been caught on Brockley meadows, but she was not with them, and they had explained their sudden departure by saying that they had mistaken the date of Chorton Fair, and had gone off in a hurry for fear they might be late.
Indeed, they had been quite distressed at hearing of Virginia’s disappearance, as they were very grateful to Mr. Otis for having allowed them to camp in his park, and four of their number had stayed behind to help in the search.
The carp-pond had been dragged, and the whole Chase thoroughly gone over, but without any result.
It was evident that, for that night at any rate, Virginia was lost to them; and it was in a state of the deepest depression that Mr. Otis and the boys walked up to the house, the groom following behind with the two horses and the pony.
In the hall they found a group of frightened servants, and lying on a sofa in the library was poor Mrs.
Otis, almost out of her mind with terror and anxiety, and having her forehead bathed with eau-de-cologne by the old housekeeper.
Mr. Otis at once insisted on her having something to eat, and ordered up supper for the whole party.
It was a melancholy meal, as hardly any one spoke, and even the twins were awestruck and subdued, as they were very fond of their sister.
When they had finished, Mr. Otis, in spite of the entreaties of the little Duke, ordered them all to bed, saying that nothing more could be done that night, and that he would telegraph in the morning to Scotland Yard for some detectives to be sent down immediately.
Just as they were passing out of the dining-room, midnight began to boom from the clock tower, and when the last stroke sounded they heard a crash and a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of thunder shook the house, a strain of unearthly music floated through the air, a panel at the top of the staircase flew back with a loud noise, and out on the landing, looking very pale and white, with a little casket in her hand, stepped Virginia.
In a moment they had all rushed up to her.
Mrs.
Otis clasped her passionately in her arms, the Duke smothered her with violent kisses, and the twins executed a wild war-dance round the group.
‘Good heavens! child, where have you been?’ said Mr. Otis, rather angrily, thinking that she had been playing some foolish trick on them.
‘Cecil and I have been riding all over the country looking for you, and your mother has been frightened to death.
You must never play these practical jokes any more.’  ‘Except on the Ghost! except on the Ghost!’ shrieked the twins, as they capered about.
‘My own darling, thank God you are found; you must never leave my side again,’ murmured Mrs.
Otis, as she kissed the trembling child, and smoothed the tangled gold of her hair.
‘Papa,’ said Virginia quietly, ‘I have been with the Ghost.
He is dead, and you must come and see him.
He had been very wicked, but he was really sorry for all that he had done, and he gave me this box of beautiful jewels before he died.’  The whole family gazed at her in mute amazement, but she was quite grave and serious; and, turning round, she led them through the opening in the wainscoting down a narrow secret corridor, Washington following with a lighted candle, which he had caught up from the table.
Finally, they came to a great oak door, studded with rusty nails.
When Virginia touched it, it swung back on its heavy hinges, and they found themselves in a little low room, with a vaulted ceiling, and one tiny grated window.
Imbedded in the wall was a huge iron ring, and chained to it was a gaunt skeleton, that was stretched out at full length on the stone floor, and seemed to be trying to grasp with its long fleshless fingers an old-fashioned trencher and ewer, that were placed just out of its reach.
The jug had evidently been once filled with water, as it was covered inside with green mould.
There was nothing on the trencher but a pile of dust.
Virginia knelt down beside the skeleton, and, folding her little hands together, began to pray silently, while the rest of the party looked on in wonder at the terrible tragedy whose secret was now disclosed to them.
‘Hallo!’ suddenly exclaimed one of the twins, who had been looking out of the window to try and discover in what wing of the house the room was situated.
‘Hallo! the old withered almond-tree has blossomed.
I can see the flowers quite plainly in the moonlight.’  ‘God has forgiven him,’ said Virginia gravely, as she rose to her feet, and a beautiful light seemed to illumine her face.
‘What an angel you are!’ cried the young Duke, and he put his arm round her neck and kissed her.
FOUR days after these curious incidents a funeral started from Canterville Chase at about eleven o’clock at night.
The hearse was drawn by eight black horses, each of which carried on its head a great tuft of nodding ostrich-plumes, and the leaden coffin was covered by a rich purple pall, on which was embroidered in gold the Canterville coat-of-arms.
By the side of the hearse and the coaches walked the servants with lighted torches, and the whole procession was wonderfully impressive.
Lord Canterville was the chief mourner, having come up specially from Wales to attend the funeral, and sat in the first carriage along with little Virginia.
Then came the United States Minister and his wife, then Washington and the three boys, and in the last carriage was Mrs.
Umney.
It was generally felt that, as she had been frightened by the ghost for more than fifty years of her life, she had a right to see the last of him.
A deep grave had been dug in the corner of the churchyard, just under the old yew-tree, and the service was read in the most impressive manner by the Rev.
Augustus Dampier.
When the ceremony was over, the servants, according to an old custom observed in the Canterville family, extinguished their torches, and, as the coffin was being lowered into the grave, Virginia stepped forward and laid on it a large cross made of white and pink almond-blossoms.
As she did so, the moon came out from behind a cloud, and flooded with its silent silver the little churchyard, and from a distant copse a nightingale began to sing.
She thought of the ghost’s description of the Garden of Death, her eyes became dim with tears, and she hardly spoke a word during the drive home.
The next morning, before Lord Canterville went up to town, Mr. Otis had an interview with him on the subject of the jewels the ghost had given to Virginia.
They were perfectly magnificent, especially a certain ruby necklace with old Venetian setting, which was really a superb specimen of sixteenth-century work, and their value was so great that Mr. Otis felt considerable scruples about allowing his daughter to accept them.
‘My lord,’ he said, ‘I know that in this country mortmain is held to apply to trinkets as well as to land, and it is quite clear to me that these jewels are, or should be, heirlooms in your family.
I must beg you, accordingly, to take them to London with you, and to regard them simply as a portion of your property which has been restored to you under certain strange conditions.
As for my daughter, she is merely a child, and has as yet, I am glad to say, but little interest in such appurtenances of idle luxury.
I am also informed by Mrs.
Otis, who, I may say, is no mean authority upon Art—having had the privilege of spending several winters in Boston when she was a girl—that these gems are of great monetary worth, and if offered for sale would fetch a tall price.
Under these circumstances, Lord Canterville, I feel sure that you will recognise how impossible it would be for me to allow them to remain in the possession of any member of my family; and, indeed, all such vain gauds and toys, however suitable or necessary to the dignity of the British aristocracy, would be completely out of place among those who have been brought up on the severe, and I believe immortal, principles of republican simplicity.
Perhaps I should mention that Virginia is very anxious that you should allow her to retain the box as a memento of your unfortunate but misguided ancestor.
As it is extremely old, and consequently a good deal out of repair, you may perhaps think fit to comply with her request.
For my own part, I confess I am a good deal surprised to find a child of mine expressing sympathy with mediævalism in any form, and can only account for it by the fact that Virginia was born in one of your London suburbs shortly after Mrs.
Otis had returned from a trip to Athens.’  Lord Canterville listened very gravely to the worthy Minister’s speech, pulling his grey moustache now and then to hide an involuntary smile, and when Mr. Otis had ended, he shook him cordially by the hand, and said, ‘My dear sir, your charming little daughter rendered my unlucky ancestor, Sir Simon, a very important service, and I and my family are much indebted to her for her marvellous courage and pluck.
The jewels are clearly hers, and, egad, I believe that if I were heartless enough to take them from her, the wicked old fellow would be out of his grave in a fortnight, leading me the devil of a life.
As for their being heirlooms, nothing is an heirloom that is not so mentioned in a will or legal document, and the existence of these jewels has been quite unknown.
I assure you I have no more claim on them than your butler, and when Miss Virginia grows up I daresay she will be pleased to have pretty things to wear.
Besides, you forget, Mr. Otis, that you took the furniture and the ghost at a valuation, and anything that belonged to the ghost passed at once into your possession, as, whatever activity Sir Simon may have shown in the corridor at night, in point of law he was really dead, and you acquired his property by purchase.’  Mr. Otis was a good deal distressed at Lord Canterville’s refusal, and begged him to reconsider his decision, but the good-natured peer was quite firm, and finally induced the Minister to allow his daughter to retain the present the ghost had given her, and when, in the spring of 1890, the young Duchess of Cheshire was presented at the Queen’s first drawing-room on the occasion of her marriage, her jewels were the universal theme of admiration.
For Virginia received the coronet, which is the reward of all good little American girls, and was married to her boy-lover as soon as he came of age.
They were both so charming, and they loved each other so much, that every one was delighted at the match, except the old Marchioness of Dumbleton, who had tried to catch the Duke for one of her seven unmarried daughters, and had given no less than three expensive dinner-parties for that purpose, and, strange to say, Mr. Otis himself.
Mr. Otis was extremely fond of the young Duke personally, but, theoretically, he objected to titles, and, to use his own words, ‘was not without apprehension lest, amid the enervating influences of a pleasure-loving aristocracy, the true principles of republican simplicity should be forgotten.’  His objections, however, were completely overruled, and I believe that when he walked up the aisle of St. George’s, Hanover Square, with his daughter leaning on his arm, there was not a prouder man in the whole length and breadth of England.
The Duke and Duchess, after the honeymoon was over, went down to Canterville Chase, and on the day after their arrival they walked over in the afternoon to the lonely churchyard by the pine-woods.
There had been a great deal of difficulty at first about the inscription on Sir Simon’s tombstone, but finally it had been decided to engrave on it simply the initials of the old gentleman’s name, and the verse from the library window.
The Duchess had brought with her some lovely roses, which she strewed upon the grave, and after they had stood by it for some time they strolled into the ruined chancel of the old abbey.
There the Duchess sat down on a fallen pillar, while her husband lay at her feet smoking a cigarette and looking up at her beautiful eyes.
Suddenly he threw his cigarette away, took hold of her hand, and said to her, ‘Virginia, a wife should have no secrets from her husband.’  ‘Dear Cecil!  I have no secrets from you.’  ‘Yes, you have,’ he answered, smiling, ‘you have never told me what happened to you when you were locked up with the ghost.’  ‘I have never told any one, Cecil,’ said Virginia gravely.
‘I know that, but you might tell me.’  ‘Please don’t ask me, Cecil, I cannot tell you.
Poor Sir Simon!  I owe him a great deal.
Yes, don’t laugh, Cecil, I really do.
He made me see what Life is, and what Death signifies, and why Love is stronger than both.’  The Duke rose and kissed his wife lovingly.
‘You can have your secret as long as I have your heart,’ he murmured.
‘You have always had that, Cecil.’  ‘And you will tell our children some day, won’t you?’  Virginia blushed.
THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET AN ETCHING   ONE afternoon I was sitting outside the Café de la Paix, watching the splendour and shabbiness of Parisian life, and wondering over my vermouth at the strange panorama of pride and poverty that was passing before me, when I heard some one call my name.
I turned round, and saw Lord Murchison.
We had not met since we had been at college together, nearly ten years before, so I was delighted to come across him again, and we shook hands warmly.
At Oxford we had been great friends.
I had liked him immensely, he was so handsome, so high-spirited, and so honourable.
We used to say of him that he would be the best of fellows, if he did not always speak the truth, but I think we really admired him all the more for his frankness.
I found him a good deal changed.
He looked anxious and puzzled, and seemed to be in doubt about something.
I felt it could not be modern scepticism, for Murchison was the stoutest of Tories, and believed in the Pentateuch as firmly as he believed in the House of Peers; so I concluded that it was a woman, and asked him if he was married yet.
‘I don’t understand women well enough,’ he answered.
‘My dear Gerald,’ I said, ‘women are meant to be loved, not to be understood.’  ‘I cannot love where I cannot trust,’ he replied.
‘I believe you have a mystery in your life, Gerald,’ I exclaimed; ‘tell me about it.’  ‘Let us go for a drive,’ he answered, ‘it is too crowded here.
No, not a yellow carriage, any other colour—there, that dark green one will do’; and in a few moments we were trotting down the boulevard in the direction of the Madeleine.
‘Where shall we go to?’ I said.
‘Oh, anywhere you like!’ he answered—‘to the restaurant in the Bois; we will dine there, and you shall tell me all about yourself.’  ‘I want to hear about you first,’ I said.
‘Tell me your mystery.’  He took from his pocket a little silver-clasped morocco case, and handed it to me.
I opened it.
Inside there was the photograph of a woman.
She was tall and slight, and strangely picturesque with her large vague eyes and loosened hair.
She looked like a _clairvoyante_, and was wrapped in rich furs.
‘What do you think of that face?’ he said; ‘is it truthful?’  I examined it carefully.
It seemed to me the face of some one who had a secret, but whether that secret was good or evil I could not say.
Its beauty was a beauty moulded out of many mysteries—the beauty, in fact, which is psychological, not plastic—and the faint smile that just played across the lips was far too subtle to be really sweet.
‘Well,’ he cried impatiently, ‘what do you say?’  ‘She is the Gioconda in sables,’ I answered.
‘Let me know all about her.’  ‘Not now,’ he said; ‘after dinner,’ and began to talk of other things.
When the waiter brought us our coffee and cigarettes I reminded Gerald of his promise.
He rose from his seat, walked two or three times up and down the room, and, sinking into an armchair, told me the following story:—  ‘One evening,’ he said, ‘I was walking down Bond Street about five o’clock.
There was a terrific crush of carriages, and the traffic was almost stopped.
Close to the pavement was standing a little yellow brougham, which, for some reason or other, attracted my attention.
As I passed by there looked out from it the face I showed you this afternoon.
It fascinated me immediately.
All that night I kept thinking of it, and all the next day.
I wandered up and down that wretched Row, peering into every carriage, and waiting for the yellow brougham; but I could not find _ma belle inconnue_, and at last I began to think she was merely a dream.
About a week afterwards I was dining with Madame de Rastail.
Dinner was for eight o’clock; but at half-past eight we were still waiting in the drawing-room.
Finally the servant threw open the door, and announced Lady Alroy.
It was the woman I had been looking for.
She came in very slowly, looking like a moonbeam in grey lace, and, to my intense delight, I was asked to take her in to dinner.
After we had sat down, I remarked quite innocently, “I think I caught sight of you in Bond Street some time ago, Lady Alroy.”  She grew very pale, and said to me in a low voice, “Pray do not talk so loud; you may be overheard.”  I felt miserable at having made such a bad beginning, and plunged recklessly into the subject of the French plays.
She spoke very little, always in the same low musical voice, and seemed as if she was afraid of some one listening.
I fell passionately, stupidly in love, and the indefinable atmosphere of mystery that surrounded her excited my most ardent curiosity.
When she was going away, which she did very soon after dinner, I asked her if I might call and see her.
She hesitated for a moment, glanced round to see if any one was near us, and then said, “Yes; to-morrow at a quarter to five.”  I begged Madame de Rastail to tell me about her; but all that I could learn was that she was a widow with a beautiful house in Park Lane, and as some scientific bore began a dissertation on widows, as exemplifying the survival of the matrimonially fittest, I left and went home.
‘The next day I arrived at Park Lane punctual to the moment, but was told by the butler that Lady Alroy had just gone out.
I went down to the club quite unhappy and very much puzzled, and after long consideration wrote her a letter, asking if I might be allowed to try my chance some other afternoon.
I had no answer for several days, but at last I got a little note saying she would be at home on Sunday at four and with this extraordinary postscript: “Please do not write to me here again; I will explain when I see you.”  On Sunday she received me, and was perfectly charming; but when I was going away she begged of me, if I ever had occasion to write to her again, to address my letter to “Mrs.
Knox, care of Whittaker’s Library, Green Street.”  “There are reasons,” she said, “why I cannot receive letters in my own house.”  ‘All through the season I saw a great deal of her, and the atmosphere of mystery never left her.
Sometimes I thought that she was in the power of some man, but she looked so unapproachable, that I could not believe it.
It was really very difficult for me to come to any conclusion, for she was like one of those strange crystals that one sees in museums, which are at one moment clear, and at another clouded.
At last I determined to ask her to be my wife: I was sick and tired of the incessant secrecy that she imposed on all my visits, and on the few letters I sent her.
I wrote to her at the library to ask her if she could see me the following Monday at six.
She answered yes, and I was in the seventh heaven of delight.
I was infatuated with her: in spite of the mystery, I thought then—in consequence of it, I see now.
No; it was the woman herself I loved.
The mystery troubled me, maddened me.
Why did chance put me in its track?’  ‘You discovered it, then?’ I cried.
‘I fear so,’ he answered.
‘You can judge for yourself.’  ‘When Monday came round I went to lunch with my uncle, and about four o’clock found myself in the Marylebone Road.
My uncle, you know, lives in Regent’s Park.
I wanted to get to Piccadilly, and took a short cut through a lot of shabby little streets.
Suddenly I saw in front of me Lady Alroy, deeply veiled and walking very fast.
On coming to the last house in the street, she went up the steps, took out a latch-key, and let herself in.
“Here is the mystery,” I said to myself; and I hurried on and examined the house.
It seemed a sort of place for letting lodgings.
On the doorstep lay her handkerchief, which she had dropped.
I picked it up and put it in my pocket.
Then I began to consider what I should do.
I came to the conclusion that I had no right to spy on her, and I drove down to the club.
At six I called to see her.
She was lying on a sofa, in a tea-gown of silver tissue looped up by some strange moonstones that she always wore.
She was looking quite lovely.
“I am so glad to see you,” she said; “I have not been out all day.”  I stared at her in amazement, and pulling the handkerchief out of my pocket, handed it to her.
“You dropped this in Cumnor Street this afternoon, Lady Alroy,”  I said very calmly.
She looked at me in terror but made no attempt to take the handkerchief.
“What were you doing there?” I asked.
“What right have you to question me?” she answered.
“The right of a man who loves you,” I replied; “I came here to ask you to be my wife.”  She hid her face in her hands, and burst into floods of tears.
“You must tell me,” I continued.
She stood up, and, looking me straight in the face, said, “Lord Murchison, there is nothing to tell you.”—“You went to meet some one,” I cried; “this is your mystery.”  She grew dreadfully white, and said, “I went to meet no one.”—“Can’t you tell the truth?” I exclaimed.
“I have told it,” she replied.
I was mad, frantic; I don’t know what I said, but I said terrible things to her.
Finally I rushed out of the house.
She wrote me a letter the next day; I sent it back unopened, and started for Norway with Alan Colville.
After a month I came back, and the first thing I saw in the _Morning Post_ was the death of Lady Alroy.
She had caught a chill at the Opera, and had died in five days of congestion of the lungs.
I shut myself up and saw no one.
I had loved her so much, I had loved her so madly.
Good God! how I had loved that woman!’  ‘You went to the street, to the house in it?’ I said.
‘Yes,’ he answered.
‘One day I went to Cumnor Street.
I could not help it; I was tortured with doubt.
I knocked at the door, and a respectable-looking woman opened it to me.
I asked her if she had any rooms to let.
“Well, sir,” she replied, “the drawing-rooms are supposed to be let; but I have not seen the lady for three months, and as rent is owing on them, you can have them.”—“Is this the lady?” I said, showing the photograph.
“That’s her, sure enough,” she exclaimed; “and when is she coming back, sir?”—“The lady is dead,” I replied.
“Oh sir, I hope not!” said the woman; “she was my best lodger.
She paid me three guineas a week merely to sit in my drawing-rooms now and then.”  “She met some one here?” I said; but the woman assured me that it was not so, that she always came alone, and saw no one.
“What on earth did she do here?” I cried.
“She simply sat in the drawing-room, sir, reading books, and sometimes had tea,” the woman answered.
I did not know what to say, so I gave her a sovereign and went away.
Now, what do you think it all meant?
You don’t believe the woman was telling the truth?’  ‘I do.’  ‘Then why did Lady Alroy go there?’  ‘My dear Gerald,’ I answered, ‘Lady Alroy was simply a woman with a mania for mystery.
She took these rooms for the pleasure of going there with her veil down, and imagining she was a heroine.
She had a passion for secrecy, but she herself was merely a Sphinx without a secret.’  ‘Do you really think so?’  ‘I am sure of it,’ I replied.
He took out the morocco case, opened it, and looked at the photograph.
‘I wonder?’ he said at last.
THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE A NOTE OF ADMIRATION   UNLESS one is wealthy there is no use in being a charming fellow.
Romance is the privilege of the rich, not the profession of the unemployed.
The poor should be practical and prosaic.
It is better to have a permanent income than to be fascinating.
These are the great truths of modern life which Hughie Erskine never realised.
Poor Hughie! Intellectually, we must admit, he was not of much importance.
He never said a brilliant or even an ill-natured thing in his life.
But then he was wonderfully good-looking, with his crisp brown hair, his clear-cut profile, and his grey eyes.
He was as popular with men as he was with women and he had every accomplishment except that of making money.
His father had bequeathed him his cavalry sword and a _History of the Peninsular War_ in fifteen volumes.
Hughie hung the first over his looking-glass, put the second on a shelf between _Ruff’s Guide_ and _Bailey’s Magazine_, and lived on two hundred a year that an old aunt allowed him.
He had tried everything.
He had gone on the Stock Exchange for six months; but what was a butterfly to do among bulls and bears?
He had been a tea-merchant for a little longer, but had soon tired of pekoe and souchong.
Then he had tried selling dry sherry.
That did not answer; the sherry was a little too dry.
Ultimately he became nothing, a delightful, ineffectual young man with a perfect profile and no profession.
To make matters worse, he was in love.
The girl he loved was Laura Merton, the daughter of a retired Colonel who had lost his temper and his digestion in India, and had never found either of them again.
Laura adored him, and he was ready to kiss her shoe-strings.
They were the handsomest couple in London, and had not a penny-piece between them.
The Colonel was very fond of Hughie, but would not hear of any engagement.
‘Come to me, my boy, when you have got ten thousand pounds of your own, and we will see about it,’ he used to say; and Hughie looked very glum in those days, and had to go to Laura for consolation.
One morning, as he was on his way to Holland Park, where the Mertons lived, he dropped in to see a great friend of his, Alan Trevor.
Trevor was a painter.
Indeed, few people escape that nowadays.
But he was also an artist, and artists are rather rare.
Personally he was a strange rough fellow, with a freckled face and a red ragged beard.
However, when he took up the brush he was a real master, and his pictures were eagerly sought after.
He had been very much attracted by Hughie at first, it must be acknowledged, entirely on account of his personal charm.
‘The only people a painter should know,’ he used to say, ‘are people who are _bête_ and beautiful, people who are an artistic pleasure to look at and an intellectual repose to talk to.
Men who are dandies and women who are darlings rule the world, at least they should do so.’  However, after he got to know Hughie better, he liked him quite as much for his bright, buoyant spirits and his generous, reckless nature, and had given him the permanent _entrée_ to his studio.
When Hughie came in he found Trevor putting the finishing touches to a wonderful life-size picture of a beggar-man.
The beggar himself was standing on a raised platform in a corner of the studio.
He was a wizened old man, with a face like wrinkled parchment, and a most piteous expression.
Over his shoulders was flung a coarse brown cloak, all tears and tatters; his thick boots were patched and cobbled, and with one hand he leant on a rough stick, while with the other he held out his battered hat for alms.
‘What an amazing model!’ whispered Hughie, as he shook hands with his friend.
‘An amazing model?’ shouted Trevor at the top of his voice; ‘I should think so!  Such beggars as he are not to be met with every day.
A _trouvaille_, _mon cher_; a living Velasquez!  My stars! what an etching Rembrandt would have made of him!’  ‘Poor old chap!’ said Hughie, ‘how miserable he looks!  But I suppose, to you painters, his face is his fortune?’  ‘Certainly,’ replied Trevor, ‘you don’t want a beggar to look happy, do you?’  ‘How much does a model get for sitting?’ asked Hughie, as he found himself a comfortable seat on a divan.
‘A shilling an hour.’  ‘And how much do you get for your picture, Alan?’  ‘Oh, for this I get two thousand!’  ‘Pounds?’  ‘Guineas.
Painters, poets, and physicians always get guineas.’  ‘Well, I think the model should have a percentage,’ cried Hughie, laughing; ‘they work quite as hard as you do.’  ‘Nonsense, nonsense!  Why, look at the trouble of laying on the paint alone, and standing all day long at one’s easel!  It’s all very well, Hughie, for you to talk, but I assure you that there are moments when Art almost attains to the dignity of manual labour.
But you mustn’t chatter; I’m very busy.
Smoke a cigarette, and keep quiet.’  After some time the servant came in, and told Trevor that the framemaker wanted to speak to him.
‘Don’t run away, Hughie,’ he said, as he went out, ‘I will be back in a moment.’  The old beggar-man took advantage of Trevor’s absence to rest for a moment on a wooden bench that was behind him.
He looked so forlorn and wretched that Hughie could not help pitying him, and felt in his pockets to see what money he had.
All he could find was a sovereign and some coppers.
‘Poor old fellow,’ he thought to himself, ‘he wants it more than I do, but it means no hansoms for a fortnight’; and he walked across the studio and slipped the sovereign into the beggar’s hand.
The old man started, and a faint smile flitted across his withered lips.
‘Thank you, sir,’ he said, ‘thank you.’  Then Trevor arrived, and Hughie took his leave, blushing a little at what he had done.
He spent the day with Laura, got a charming scolding for his extravagance, and had to walk home.
That night he strolled into the Palette Club about eleven o’clock, and found Trevor sitting by himself in the smoking-room drinking hock and seltzer.
‘Well, Alan, did you get the picture finished all right?’ he said, as he lit his cigarette.
‘Finished and framed, my boy!’ answered Trevor; ‘and, by the bye, you have made a conquest.
That old model you saw is quite devoted to you.
I had to tell him all about you—who you are, where you live, what your income is, what prospects you have—’  ‘My dear Alan,’ cried Hughie, ‘I shall probably find him waiting for me when I go home.
But of course you are only joking.
Poor old wretch!  I wish I could do something for him.
I think it is dreadful that any one should be so miserable.
I have got heaps of old clothes at home—do you think he would care for any of them?
Why, his rags were falling to bits.’  ‘But he looks splendid in them,’ said Trevor.
‘I wouldn’t paint him in a frock coat for anything.
What you call rags I call romance.
What seems poverty to you is picturesqueness to me.
However, I’ll tell him of your offer.’  ‘Alan,’ said Hughie seriously, ‘you painters are a heartless lot.’  ‘An artist’s heart is his head,’ replied Trevor; ‘and besides, our business is to realise the world as we see it, not to reform it as we know it.
_À chacun son métier_.
And now tell me how Laura is.
The old model was quite interested in her.’  ‘You don’t mean to say you talked to him about her?’ said Hughie.
‘Certainly I did.
He knows all about the relentless colonel, the lovely Laura, and the £10,000.’  ‘You told that old beggar all my private affairs?’ cried Hughie, looking very red and angry.
‘My dear boy,’ said Trevor, smiling, ‘that old beggar, as you call him, is one of the richest men in Europe.
He could buy all London to-morrow without overdrawing his account.
He has a house in every capital, dines off gold plate, and can prevent Russia going to war when he chooses.’  ‘What on earth do you mean?’ exclaimed Hughie.
‘What I say,’ said Trevor.
‘The old man you saw to-day in the studio was Baron Hausberg.
He is a great friend of mine, buys all my pictures and that sort of thing, and gave me a commission a month ago to paint him as a beggar.
_Que voulez-vous_?
_La fantaisie d’un millionnaire_!  And I must say he made a magnificent figure in his rags, or perhaps I should say in my rags; they are an old suit I got in Spain.’  ‘Baron Hausberg!’ cried Hughie.
‘Good heavens!  I gave him a sovereign!’ and he sank into an armchair the picture of dismay.
‘Gave him a sovereign!’ shouted Trevor, and he burst into a roar of laughter.
‘My dear boy, you’ll never see it again.
_Son affaire c’est l’argent des autres_.’  ‘I think you might have told me, Alan,’ said Hughie sulkily, ‘and not have let me make such a fool of myself.’  ‘Well, to begin with, Hughie,’ said Trevor, ‘it never entered my mind that you went about distributing alms in that reckless way.
I can understand your kissing a pretty model, but your giving a sovereign to an ugly one—by Jove, no!  Besides, the fact is that I really was not at home to-day to any one; and when you came in I didn’t know whether Hausberg would like his name mentioned.
You know he wasn’t in full dress.’  ‘What a duffer he must think me!’ said Hughie.
‘Not at all.
He was in the highest spirits after you left; kept chuckling to himself and rubbing his old wrinkled hands together.
I couldn’t make out why he was so interested to know all about you; but I see it all now.
He’ll invest your sovereign for you, Hughie, pay you the interest every six months, and have a capital story to tell after dinner.’  ‘I am an unlucky devil,’ growled Hughie.
‘The best thing I can do is to go to bed; and, my dear Alan, you mustn’t tell any one.
I shouldn’t dare show my face in the Row.’  ‘Nonsense!  It reflects the highest credit on your philanthropic spirit, Hughie.
And don’t run away.
Have another cigarette, and you can talk about Laura as much as you like.’  However, Hughie wouldn’t stop, but walked home, feeling very unhappy, and leaving Alan Trevor in fits of laughter.
The next morning, as he was at breakfast, the servant brought him up a card on which was written, ‘Monsieur Gustave Naudin, _de la part de_ M.
le Baron Hausberg.’  ‘I suppose he has come for an apology,’ said Hughie to himself; and he told the servant to show the visitor up.
An old gentleman with gold spectacles and grey hair came into the room, and said, in a slight French accent, ‘Have I the honour of addressing Monsieur Erskine?’  Hughie bowed.
‘I have come from Baron Hausberg,’ he continued.
‘The Baron—’  ‘I beg, sir, that you will offer him my sincerest apologies,’ stammered Hughie.
‘The Baron,’ said the old gentleman with a smile, ‘has commissioned me to bring you this letter’; and he extended a sealed envelope.
On the outside was written, ‘A wedding present to Hugh Erskine and Laura Merton, from an old beggar,’ and inside was a cheque for £10,000.
When they were married Alan Trevor was the best man, and the Baron made a speech at the wedding breakfast.
‘Millionaire models,’ remarked Alan, ‘are rare enough; but, by Jove, model millionaires are rarer still!’     THE PORTRAIT OF MR.
W.
H.
I HAD been dining with Erskine in his pretty little house in Birdcage Walk, and we were sitting in the library over our coffee and cigarettes, when the question of literary forgeries happened to turn up in conversation.
I cannot at present remember how it was that we struck upon this somewhat curious topic, as it was at that time, but I know that we had a long discussion about Macpherson, Ireland, and Chatterton, and that with regard to the last I insisted that his so-called forgeries were merely the result of an artistic desire for perfect representation; that we had no right to quarrel with an artist for the conditions under which he chooses to present his work; and that all Art being to a certain degree a mode of acting, an attempt to realise one’s own personality on some imaginative plane out of reach of the trammelling accidents and limitations of real life, to censure an artist for a forgery was to confuse an ethical with an æsthetical problem.
Erskine, who was a good deal older than I was, and had been listening to me with the amused deference of a man of forty, suddenly put his hand upon my shoulder and said to me, ‘What would you say about a young man who had a strange theory about a certain work of art, believed in his theory, and committed a forgery in order to prove it?’  ‘Ah! that is quite a different matter,’ I answered.
Erskine remained silent for a few moments, looking at the thin grey threads of smoke that were rising from his cigarette.
‘Yes,’ he said, after a pause, ‘quite different.’  There was something in the tone of his voice, a slight touch of bitterness perhaps, that excited my curiosity.
‘Did you ever know anybody who did that?’ I cried.
‘Yes,’ he answered, throwing his cigarette into the fire,—‘a great friend of mine, Cyril Graham.
He was very fascinating, and very foolish, and very heartless.
However, he left me the only legacy I ever received in my life.’  ‘What was that?’ I exclaimed.
Erskine rose from his seat, and going over to a tall inlaid cabinet that stood between the two windows, unlocked it, and came back to where I was sitting, holding in his hand a small panel picture set in an old and somewhat tarnished Elizabethan frame.
It was a full-length portrait of a young man in late sixteenth-century costume, standing by a table, with his right hand resting on an open book.
He seemed about seventeen years of age, and was of quite extraordinary personal beauty, though evidently somewhat effeminate.
Indeed, had it not been for the dress and the closely cropped hair, one would have said that the face with its dreamy wistful eyes, and its delicate scarlet lips, was the face of a girl.
In manner, and especially in the treatment of the hands, the picture reminded one of François Clouet’s later work.
The black velvet doublet with its fantastically gilded points, and the peacock-blue background against which it showed up so pleasantly, and from which it gained such luminous value of colour, were quite in Clouet’s style; and the two masks of Tragedy and Comedy that hung somewhat formally from the marble pedestal had that hard severity of touch—so different from the facile grace of the Italians—which even at the Court of France the great Flemish master never completely lost, and which in itself has always been a characteristic of the northern temper.
‘It is a charming thing,’ I cried, ‘but who is this wonderful young man, whose beauty Art has so happily preserved for us?’  ‘This is the portrait of Mr. W.
H.,’ said Erskine, with a sad smile.
It might have been a chance effect of light, but it seemed to me that his eyes were quite bright with tears.
‘Mr. W.
H.!’ I exclaimed; ‘who was Mr. W.
H.?’  ‘Don’t you remember?’ he answered; ‘look at the book on which his hand is resting.’  ‘I see there is some writing there, but I cannot make it out,’ I replied.
‘Take this magnifying-glass and try,’ said Erskine, with the same sad smile still playing about his mouth.
I took the glass, and moving the lamp a little nearer, I began to spell out the crabbed sixteenth-century handwriting.
‘To the onlie begetter of these insuing sonnets.’ .
.
.
‘Good heavens!’ I cried, ‘is this Shakespeare’s Mr. W.
H.?’  ‘Cyril Graham used to say so,’ muttered Erskine.
‘But it is not a bit like Lord Pembroke,’ I answered.
‘I know the Penshurst portraits very well.
I was staying near there a few weeks ago.’  ‘Do you really believe then that the sonnets are addressed to Lord Pembroke?’ he asked.
‘I am sure of it,’ I answered.
‘Pembroke, Shakespeare, and Mrs.
Mary Fitton are the three personages of the Sonnets; there is no doubt at all about it.’  ‘Well, I agree with you,’ said Erskine, ‘but I did not always think so.
I used to believe—well, I suppose I used to believe in Cyril Graham and his theory.’  ‘And what was that?’ I asked, looking at the wonderful portrait, which had already begun to have a strange fascination for me.
‘It is a long story,’ said Erskine, taking the picture away from me—rather abruptly I thought at the time—‘a very long story; but if you care to hear it, I will tell it to you.’  ‘I love theories about the Sonnets,’ I cried; ‘but I don’t think I am likely to be converted to any new idea.
The matter has ceased to be a mystery to any one.
Indeed, I wonder that it ever was a mystery.’  ‘As I don’t believe in the theory, I am not likely to convert you to it,’ said Erskine, laughing; ‘but it may interest you.’  ‘Tell it to me, of course,’ I answered.
‘If it is half as delightful as the picture, I shall be more than satisfied.’  ‘Well,’ said Erskine, lighting a cigarette, ‘I must begin by telling you about Cyril Graham himself.
He and I were at the same house at Eton.
I was a year or two older than he was, but we were immense friends, and did all our work and all our play together.
There was, of course, a good deal more play than work, but I cannot say that I am sorry for that.
It is always an advantage not to have received a sound commercial education, and what I learned in the playing fields at Eton has been quite as useful to me as anything I was taught at Cambridge.
I should tell you that Cyril’s father and mother were both dead.
They had been drowned in a horrible yachting accident off the Isle of Wight.
His father had been in the diplomatic service, and had married a daughter, the only daughter, in fact, of old Lord Crediton, who became Cyril’s guardian after the death of his parents.
I don’t think that Lord Crediton cared very much for Cyril.
He had never really forgiven his daughter for marrying a man who had not a title.
He was an extraordinary old aristocrat, who swore like a costermonger, and had the manners of a farmer.
I remember seeing him once on Speech-day.
He growled at me, gave me a sovereign, and told me not to grow up “a damned Radical” like my father.
Cyril had very little affection for him, and was only too glad to spend most of his holidays with us in Scotland.
They never really got on together at all.
Cyril thought him a bear, and he thought Cyril effeminate.
He was effeminate, I suppose, in some things, though he was a very good rider and a capital fencer.
In fact he got the foils before he left Eton.
But he was very languid in his manner, and not a little vain of his good looks, and had a strong objection to football.
The two things that really gave him pleasure were poetry and acting.
At Eton he was always dressing up and reciting Shakespeare, and when we went up to Trinity he became a member of the A.D.C. his first term.
I remember I was always very jealous of his acting.
I was absurdly devoted to him; I suppose because we were so different in some things.
I was a rather awkward, weakly lad, with huge feet, and horribly freckled.
Freckles run in Scotch families just as gout does in English families.
Cyril used to say that of the two he preferred the gout; but he always set an absurdly high value on personal appearance, and once read a paper before our debating society to prove that it was better to be good-looking than to be good.
He certainly was wonderfully handsome.
People who did not like him, Philistines and college tutors, and young men reading for the Church, used to say that he was merely pretty; but there was a great deal more in his face than mere prettiness.
I think he was the most splendid creature I ever saw, and nothing could exceed the grace of his movements, the charm of his manner.
He fascinated everybody who was worth fascinating, and a great many people who were not.
He was often wilful and petulant, and I used to think him dreadfully insincere.
It was due, I think, chiefly to his inordinate desire to please.
Poor Cyril!  I told him once that he was contented with very cheap triumphs, but he only laughed.
He was horribly spoiled.
All charming people, I fancy, are spoiled.
It is the secret of their attraction.
‘However, I must tell you about Cyril’s acting.
You know that no actresses are allowed to play at the A.D.C.  At least they were not in my time.
I don’t know how it is now.
Well, of course, Cyril was always cast for the girls’ parts, and when _As You Like It_ was produced he played Rosalind.
It was a marvellous performance.
In fact, Cyril Graham was the only perfect Rosalind I have ever seen.
It would be impossible to describe to you the beauty, the delicacy, the refinement of the whole thing.
It made an immense sensation, and the horrid little theatre, as it was then, was crowded every night.
Even when I read the play now I can’t help thinking of Cyril.
It might have been written for him.
The next term he took his degree, and came to London to read for the diplomatic.
But he never did any work.
He spent his days in reading Shakespeare’s Sonnets, and his evenings at the theatre.
He was, of course, wild to go on the stage.
It was all that I and Lord Crediton could do to prevent him.
Perhaps if he had gone on the stage he would be alive now.
It is always a silly thing to give advice, but to give good advice is absolutely fatal.
I hope you will never fall into that error.
If you do, you will be sorry for it.
‘Well, to come to the real point of the story, one day I got a letter from Cyril asking me to come round to his rooms that evening.
He had charming chambers in Piccadilly overlooking the Green Park, and as I used to go to see him every day, I was rather surprised at his taking the trouble to write.
Of course I went, and when I arrived I found him in a state of great excitement.
He told me that he had at last discovered the true secret of Shakespeare’s Sonnets; that all the scholars and critics had been entirely on the wrong tack; and that he was the first who, working purely by internal evidence, had found out who Mr. W.
H.
really was.
He was perfectly wild with delight, and for a long time would not tell me his theory.
Finally, he produced a bundle of notes, took his copy of the Sonnets off the mantelpiece, and sat down and gave me a long lecture on the whole subject.
‘He began by pointing out that the young man to whom Shakespeare addressed these strangely passionate poems must have been somebody who was a really vital factor in the development of his dramatic art, and that this could not be said either of Lord Pembroke or Lord Southampton.
Indeed, whoever he was, he could not have been anybody of high birth, as was shown very clearly by the 25th Sonnet, in which Shakespeare contrasting himself with those who are “great princes’ favourites,” says quite frankly—      Let those who are in favour with their stars     Of public honour and proud titles boast,     Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,     Unlook’d for joy in that I honour most.
And ends the sonnet by congratulating himself on the mean state of him he so adored.
Then happy I, that love and am beloved     Where I may not remove nor be removed.
This sonnet Cyril declared would be quite unintelligible if we fancied that it was addressed to either the Earl of Pembroke or the Earl of Southampton, both of whom were men of the highest position in England and fully entitled to be called “great princes”; and he in corroboration of his view read me Sonnets CXXIV.
and CXXV., in which Shakespeare tells us that his love is not “the child of state,” that it “suffers not in smiling pomp,” but is “builded far from accident.”  I listened with a good deal of interest, for I don’t think the point had ever been made before; but what followed was still more curious, and seemed to me at the time to dispose entirely of Pembroke’s claim.
We know from Meres that the Sonnets had been written before 1598, and Sonnet CIV.
informs us that Shakespeare’s friendship for Mr. W.
H.
had been already in existence for three years.
Now Lord Pembroke, who was born in 1580, did not come to London till he was eighteen years of age, that is to say till 1598, and Shakespeare’s acquaintance with Mr. W.
H.
must have begun in 1594, or at the latest in 1595.
Shakespeare, accordingly, could not have known Lord Pembroke till after the Sonnets had been written.
‘Cyril pointed out also that Pembroke’s father did not die till 1601; whereas it was evident from the line,      You had a father; let your son say so,  that the father of Mr. W.
H.
was dead in 1598.
Besides, it was absurd to imagine that any publisher of the time, and the preface is from the publisher’s hand, would have ventured to address William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, as Mr. W.
H.; the case of Lord Buckhurst being spoken of as Mr. Sackville being not really a parallel instance, as Lord Buckhurst was not a peer, but merely the younger son of a peer, with a courtesy title, and the passage in _England’s Parnassus_, where he is so spoken of, is not a formal and stately dedication, but simply a casual allusion.
So far for Lord Pembroke, whose supposed claims Cyril easily demolished while I sat by in wonder.
With Lord Southampton Cyril had even less difficulty.
Southampton became at a very early age the lover of Elizabeth Vernon, so he needed no entreaties to marry; he was not beautiful; he did not resemble his mother, as Mr. W.
H.
did—      Thou art thy mother’s glass, and she in thee     Calls back the lovely April of her prime;  and, above all, his Christian name was Henry, whereas the punning sonnets (CXXXV.
and CXLIII.) show that the Christian name of Shakespeare’s friend was the same as his own—_Will_.
‘As for the other suggestions of unfortunate commentators, that Mr. W.
H.
is a misprint for Mr. W.
S., meaning Mr. William Shakespeare; that “Mr. W.
H.
all” should be read “Mr. W.
Hall”; that Mr. W.
H.
is Mr. William Hathaway; and that a full stop should be placed after “wisheth,” making Mr. W.
H.
the writer and not the subject of the dedication,—Cyril got rid of them in a very short time; and it is not worth while to mention his reasons, though I remember he sent me off into a fit of laughter by reading to me, I am glad to say not in the original, some extracts from a German commentator called Barnstorff, who insisted that Mr. W.
H.
was no less a person than “Mr. William Himself.”  Nor would he allow for a moment that the Sonnets are mere satires on the work of Drayton and John Davies of Hereford.
To him, as indeed to me, they were poems of serious and tragic import, wrung out of the bitterness of Shakespeare’s heart, and made sweet by the honey of his lips.
Still less would he admit that they were merely a philosophical allegory, and that in them Shakespeare is addressing his Ideal Self, or Ideal Manhood, or the Spirit of Beauty, or the Reason, or the Divine Logos, or the Catholic Church.
He felt, as indeed I think we all must feel, that the Sonnets are addressed to an individual,—to a particular young man whose personality for some reason seems to have filled the soul of Shakespeare with terrible joy and no less terrible despair.
‘Having in this manner cleared the way as it were, Cyril asked me to dismiss from my mind any preconceived ideas I might have formed on the subject, and to give a fair and unbiassed hearing to his own theory.
The problem he pointed out was this: Who was that young man of Shakespeare’s day who, without being of noble birth or even of noble nature, was addressed by him in terms of such passionate adoration that we can but wonder at the strange worship, and are almost afraid to turn the key that unlocks the mystery of the poet’s heart?
Who was he whose physical beauty was such that it became the very corner-stone of Shakespeare’s art; the very source of Shakespeare’s inspiration; the very incarnation of Shakespeare’s dreams?
To look upon him as simply the object of certain love-poems is to miss the whole meaning of the poems: for the art of which Shakespeare talks in the Sonnets is not the art of the Sonnets themselves, which indeed were to him but slight and secret things—it is the art of the dramatist to which he is always alluding; and he to whom Shakespeare said—            Thou art all my art, and dost advance     As high as learning my rude ignorance,  he to whom he promised immortality,      Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men,—  was surely none other than the boy-actor for whom he created Viola and Imogen, Juliet and Rosalind, Portia and Desdemona, and Cleopatra herself.
This was Cyril Graham’s theory, evolved as you see purely from the Sonnets themselves, and depending for its acceptance not so much on demonstrable proof or formal evidence, but on a kind of spiritual and artistic sense, by which alone he claimed could the true meaning of the poems be discerned.
I remember his reading to me that fine sonnet—      How can my Muse want subject to invent,     While thou dost breathe, that pour’st into my verse     Thine own sweet argument, too excellent     For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me     Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;     For who’s so dumb that cannot write to thee,     When thou thyself dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth     Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;     And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth     Eternal numbers to outlive long date—  and pointing out how completely it corroborated his theory; and indeed he went through all the Sonnets carefully, and showed, or fancied that he showed, that, according to his new explanation of their meaning, things that had seemed obscure, or evil, or exaggerated, became clear and rational, and of high artistic import, illustrating Shakespeare’s conception of the true relations between the art of the actor and the art of the dramatist.
‘It is of course evident that there must have been in Shakespeare’s company some wonderful boy-actor of great beauty, to whom he intrusted the presentation of his noble heroines; for Shakespeare was a practical theatrical manager as well as an imaginative poet, and Cyril Graham had actually discovered the boy-actor’s name.
He was Will, or, as he preferred to call him, Willie Hughes.
The Christian name he found of course in the punning sonnets, CXXXV.
and CXLIII.; the surname was, according to him, hidden in the seventh line of the 20th Sonnet, where Mr. W.
H.
is described as—      A man in hew, all _Hews_ in his controwling.
‘In the original edition of the Sonnets “Hews” is printed with a capital letter and in italics, and this, he claimed, showed clearly that a play on words was intended, his view receiving a good deal of corroboration from those sonnets in which curious puns are made on the words “use” and “usury.”  Of course I was converted at once, and Willie Hughes became to me as real a person as Shakespeare.
The only objection I made to the theory was that the name of Willie Hughes does not occur in the list of the actors of Shakespeare’s company as it is printed in the first folio.
Cyril, however, pointed out that the absence of Willie Hughes’s name from this list really corroborated the theory, as it was evident from Sonnet LXXXVI.
that Willie Hughes had abandoned Shakespeare’s company to play at a rival theatre, probably in some of Chapman’s plays.
It is in reference to this that in the great sonnet on Chapman, Shakespeare said to Willie Hughes—      But when your countenance fill’d up his line,     Then lack’d I matter; that enfeebled mine—  the expression “when your countenance filled up his line” referring obviously to the beauty of the young actor giving life and reality and added charm to Chapman’s verse, the same idea being also put forward in the 79th Sonnet—      Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,     My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;     But now my gracious numbers are decay’d,     And my sick Muse doth give another place;  and in the immediately preceding sonnet, where Shakespeare says—            Every alien pen has got my _use_     And under thee their poesy disperse,  the play upon words (use=Hughes) being of course obvious, and the phrase “under thee their poesy disperse,” meaning “by your assistance as an actor bring their plays before the people.”  ‘It was a wonderful evening, and we sat up almost till dawn reading and re-reading the Sonnets.
After some time, however, I began to see that before the theory could be placed before the world in a really perfected form, it was necessary to get some independent evidence about the existence of this young actor, Willie Hughes.
If this could be once established, there could be no possible doubt about his identity with Mr. W.
H.; but otherwise the theory would fall to the ground.
I put this forward very strongly to Cyril, who was a good deal annoyed at what he called my Philistine tone of mind, and indeed was rather bitter upon the subject.
However, I made him promise that in his own interest he would not publish his discovery till he had put the whole matter beyond the reach of doubt; and for weeks and weeks we searched the registers of City churches, the Alleyn MSS.
at Dulwich, the Record Office, the papers of the Lord Chamberlain—everything, in fact, that we thought might contain some allusion to Willie Hughes.
We discovered nothing, of course, and every day the existence of Willie Hughes seemed to me to become more problematical.
Cyril was in a dreadful state, and used to go over the whole question day after day, entreating me to believe; but I saw the one flaw in the theory, and I refused to be convinced till the actual existence of Willie Hughes, a boy-actor of Elizabethan days, had been placed beyond the reach of doubt or cavil.
‘One day Cyril left town to stay with his grandfather, I thought at the time, but I afterwards heard from Lord Crediton that this was not the case; and about a fortnight afterwards I received a telegram from him, handed in at Warwick, asking me to be sure to come and dine with him that evening at eight o’clock.
When I arrived, he said to me, “The only apostle who did not deserve proof was St. Thomas, and St. Thomas was the only apostle who got it.”  I asked him what he meant.
He answered that he had not merely been able to establish the existence in the sixteenth century of a boy-actor of the name of Willie Hughes, but to prove by the most conclusive evidence that he was the Mr. W.
H.
of the Sonnets.
He would not tell me anything more at the time; but after dinner he solemnly produced the picture I showed you, and told me that he had discovered it by the merest chance nailed to the side of an old chest that he had bought at a farmhouse in Warwickshire.
The chest itself, which was a very fine example of Elizabethan work, he had, of course, brought with him, and in the centre of the front panel the initials W.
H.
were undoubtedly carved.
It was this monogram that had attracted his attention, and he told me that it was not till he had had the chest in his possession for several days that he had thought of making any careful examination of the inside.
One morning, however, he saw that one of the sides of the chest was much thicker than the other, and looking more closely, he discovered that a framed panel picture was clamped against it.
On taking it out, he found it was the picture that is now lying on the sofa.
It was very dirty, and covered with mould; but he managed to clean it, and, to his great joy, saw that he had fallen by mere chance on the one thing for which he had been looking.
Here was an authentic portrait of Mr. W.
H., with his hand resting on the dedicatory page of the Sonnets, and on the frame itself could be faintly seen the name of the young man written in black uncial letters on a faded gold ground, “Master Will.
Hews.”  ‘Well, what was I to say?
It never occurred to me for a moment that Cyril Graham was playing a trick on me, or that he was trying to prove his theory by means of a forgery.’  ‘But is it a forgery?’ I asked.
‘Of course it is,’ said Erskine.
‘It is a very good forgery; but it is a forgery none the less.
I thought at the time that Cyril was rather calm about the whole matter; but I remember he more than once told me that he himself required no proof of the kind, and that he thought the theory complete without it.
I laughed at him, and told him that without it the theory would fall to the ground, and I warmly congratulated him on the marvellous discovery.
We then arranged that the picture should be etched or facsimiled, and placed as the frontispiece to Cyril’s edition of the Sonnets; and for three months we did nothing but go over each poem line by line, till we had settled every difficulty of text or meaning.
One unlucky day I was in a print-shop in Holborn, when I saw upon the counter some extremely beautiful drawings in silver-point.
I was so attracted by them that I bought them; and the proprietor of the place, a man called Rawlings, told me that they were done by a young painter of the name of Edward Merton, who was very clever, but as poor as a church mouse.
I went to see Merton some days afterwards, having got his address from the printseller, and found a pale, interesting young man, with a rather common-looking wife—his model, as I subsequently learned.
I told him how much I admired his drawings, at which he seemed very pleased, and I asked him if he would show me some of his other work.
As we were looking over a portfolio, full of really very lovely things,—for Merton had a most delicate and delightful touch,—I suddenly caught sight of a drawing of the picture of Mr. W.
H.
There was no doubt whatever about it.
It was almost a _facsimile_—the only difference being that the two masks of Tragedy and Comedy were not suspended from the marble table as they are in the picture, but were lying on the floor at the young man’s feet.
“Where on earth did you get that?” I said.
He grew rather confused, and said—“Oh, that is nothing.
I did not know it was in this portfolio.
It is not a thing of any value.”  “It is what you did for Mr. Cyril Graham,” exclaimed his wife; “and if this gentleman wishes to buy it, let him have it.”  “For Mr. Cyril Graham?” I repeated.
“Did you paint the picture of Mr. W.
H.?”  “I don’t understand what you mean,” he answered, growing very red.
Well, the whole thing was quite dreadful.
The wife let it all out.
I gave her five pounds when I was going away.
I can’t bear to think of it now; but of course I was furious.
I went off at once to Cyril’s chambers, waited there for three hours before he came in, with that horrid lie staring me in the face, and told him I had discovered his forgery.
He grew very pale and said—“I did it purely for your sake.
You would not be convinced in any other way.
It does not affect the truth of the theory.”  “The truth of the theory!” I exclaimed; “the less we talk about that the better.
You never even believed in it yourself.
If you had, you would not have committed a forgery to prove it.”  High words passed between us; we had a fearful quarrel.
I dare say I was unjust.
The next morning he was dead.’  ‘Dead!’ I cried,  ‘Yes; he shot himself with a revolver.
Some of the blood splashed upon the frame of the picture, just where the name had been painted.
By the time I arrived—his servant had sent for me at once—the police were already there.
He had left a letter for me, evidently written in the greatest agitation and distress of mind.’  ‘What was in it?’ I asked.
‘Oh, that he believed absolutely in Willie Hughes; that the forgery of the picture had been done simply as a concession to me, and did not in the slightest degree invalidate the truth of the theory; and, that in order to show me how firm and flawless his faith in the whole thing was, he was going to offer his life as a sacrifice to the secret of the Sonnets.
It was a foolish, mad letter.
I remember he ended by saying that he intrusted to me the Willie Hughes theory, and that it was for me to present it to the world, and to unlock the secret of Shakespeare’s heart.’  ‘It is a most tragic story,’ I cried; ‘but why have you not carried out his wishes?’  Erskine shrugged his shoulders.
‘Because it is a perfectly unsound theory from beginning to end,’ he answered.
‘My dear Erskine,’ I said, getting up from my seat, ‘you are entirely wrong about the whole matter.
It is the only perfect key to Shakespeare’s Sonnets that has ever been made.
It is complete in every detail.
I believe in Willie Hughes.’  ‘Don’t say that,’ said Erskine gravely; ‘I believe there is something fatal about the idea, and intellectually there is nothing to be said for it.
I have gone into the whole matter, and I assure you the theory is entirely fallacious.
It is plausible up to a certain point.
Then it stops.
For heaven’s sake, my dear boy, don’t take up the subject of Willie Hughes.
You will break your heart over it.’  ‘Erskine,’ I answered, ‘it is your duty to give this theory to the world.
If you will not do it, I will.
By keeping it back you wrong the memory of Cyril Graham, the youngest and the most splendid of all the martyrs of literature.
I entreat you to do him justice.
He died for this thing,—don’t let his death be in vain.’  Erskine looked at me in amazement.
‘You are carried away by the sentiment of the whole story,’ he said.
‘You forget that a thing is not necessarily true because a man dies for it.
I was devoted to Cyril Graham.
His death was a horrible blow to me.
I did not recover it for years.
I don’t think I have ever recovered it.
But Willie Hughes?
There is nothing in the idea of Willie Hughes.
No such person ever existed.
As for bringing the whole thing before the world—the world thinks that Cyril Graham shot himself by accident.
The only proof of his suicide was contained in the letter to me, and of this letter the public never heard anything.
To the present day Lord Crediton thinks that the whole thing was accidental.’  ‘Cyril Graham sacrificed his life to a great Idea,’ I answered; ‘and if you will not tell of his martyrdom, tell at least of his faith.’  ‘His faith,’ said Erskine, ‘was fixed in a thing that was false, in a thing that was unsound, in a thing that no Shakespearean scholar would accept for a moment.
The theory would be laughed at.
Don’t make a fool of yourself, and don’t follow a trail that leads nowhere.
You start by assuming the existence of the very person whose existence is the thing to be proved.
Besides, everybody knows that the Sonnets were addressed to Lord Pembroke.
The matter is settled once for all.’  ‘The matter is not settled!’ I exclaimed.
‘I will take up the theory where Cyril Graham left it, and I will prove to the world that he was right.’  ‘Silly boy!’ said Erskine.
‘Go home: it is after two, and don’t think about Willie Hughes any more.
I am sorry I told you anything about it, and very sorry indeed that I should have converted you to a thing in which I don’t believe.’  ‘You have given me the key to the greatest mystery of modern literature,’ I answered; ‘and I shall not rest till I have made you recognise, till I have made everybody recognise, that Cyril Graham was the most subtle Shakespearean critic of our day.’  As I walked home through St. James’s Park the dawn was just breaking over London.
The white swans were lying asleep on the polished lake, and the gaunt Palace looked purple against the pale-green sky.
I thought of Cyril Graham, and my eyes filled with tears.
IT was past twelve o’clock when I awoke, and the sun was streaming in through the curtains of my room in long slanting beams of dusty gold.
I told my servant that I would be at home to no one; and after I had had a cup of chocolate and a _petit-pain_, I took down from the book-shelf my copy of Shakespeare’s Sonnets, and began to go carefully through them.
Every poem seemed to me to corroborate Cyril Graham’s theory.
I felt as if I had my hand upon Shakespeare’s heart, and was counting each separate throb and pulse of passion.
I thought of the wonderful boy-actor, and saw his face in every line.
Two sonnets, I remember, struck me particularly: they were the 53rd and the 67th.
In the first of these, Shakespeare, complimenting Willie Hughes on the versatility of his acting, on his wide range of parts, a range extending from Rosalind to Juliet, and from Beatrice to Ophelia, says to him—      What is your substance, whereof are you made,     That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,     And you, but one, can every shadow lend—  lines that would be unintelligible if they were not addressed to an actor, for the word ‘shadow’ had in Shakespeare’s day a technical meaning connected with the stage.
‘The best in this kind are but shadows,’ says Theseus of the actors in the _Midsummer Night’s Dream_, and there are many similar allusions in the literature of the day.
These sonnets evidently belonged to the series in which Shakespeare discusses the nature of the actor’s art, and of the strange and rare temperament that is essential to the perfect stage-player.
‘How is it,’ says Shakespeare to Willie Hughes, ‘that you have so many personalities?’ and then he goes on to point out that his beauty is such that it seems to realise every form and phase of fancy, to embody each dream of the creative imagination—an idea that is still further expanded in the sonnet that immediately follows, where, beginning with the fine thought,      O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem     By that sweet ornament which _truth_ doth give!  Shakespeare invites us to notice how the truth of acting, the truth of visible presentation on the stage, adds to the wonder of poetry, giving life to its loveliness, and actual reality to its ideal form.
And yet, in the 67th Sonnet, Shakespeare calls upon Willie Hughes to abandon the stage with its artificiality, its false mimic life of painted face and unreal costume, its immoral influences and suggestions, its remoteness from the true world of noble action and sincere utterance.
Ah, wherefore with infection should he live     And with his presence grace impiety,     That sin by him advantage should achieve     And lace itself with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,     And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek     Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
It may seem strange that so great a dramatist as Shakespeare, who realised his own perfection as an artist and his humanity as a man on the ideal plane of stage-writing and stage-playing, should have written in these terms about the theatre; but we must remember that in Sonnets CX.
and CXI.
Shakespeare shows us that he too was wearied of the world of puppets, and full of shame at having made himself ‘a motley to the view.’ The 111th Sonnet is especially bitter:—      O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,     The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,     That did not better for my life provide     Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,     And almost thence my nature is subdued     To what it works in, like the dyer’s hand:     Pity me then and wish I were renew’d—  and there are many signs elsewhere of the same feeling, signs familiar to all real students of Shakespeare.
One point puzzled me immensely as I read the Sonnets, and it was days before I struck on the true interpretation, which indeed Cyril Graham himself seems to have missed.
I could not understand how it was that Shakespeare set so high a value on his young friend marrying.
He himself had married young, and the result had been unhappiness, and it was not likely that he would have asked Willie Hughes to commit the same error.
The boy-player of Rosalind had nothing to gain from marriage, or from the passions of real life.
The early sonnets, with their strange entreaties to have children, seemed to me a jarring note.
The explanation of the mystery came on me quite suddenly, and I found it in the curious dedication.
It will be remembered that the dedication runs as follows:—                             TO THE ONLIE BEGETTER OF                             THESE INSUING SONNETS                            MR.
W.
H.
ALL HAPPINESSE                               AND THAT ETERNITIE                                    PROMISED                                       BY                              OUR EVER-LIVING POET                                    WISHETH                                THE WELL-WISHING                                 ADVENTURER IN                                    SETTING                                     FORTH.
T.
T.
Some scholars have supposed that the word ‘begetter’ in this dedication means simply the procurer of the Sonnets for Thomas Thorpe the publisher; but this view is now generally abandoned, and the highest authorities are quite agreed that it is to be taken in the sense of inspirer, the metaphor being drawn from the analogy of physical life.
Now I saw that the same metaphor was used by Shakespeare himself all through the poems, and this set me on the right track.
Finally I made my great discovery.
The marriage that Shakespeare proposes for Willie Hughes is the marriage with his Muse, an expression which is definitely put forward in the 82nd Sonnet, where, in the bitterness of his heart at the defection of the boy-actor for whom he had written his greatest parts, and whose beauty had indeed suggested them, he opens his complaint by saying—      I grant thou wert not married to my Muse.
The children he begs him to beget are no children of flesh and blood, but more immortal children of undying fame.
The whole cycle of the early sonnets is simply Shakespeare’s invitation to Willie Hughes to go upon the stage and become a player.
How barren and profitless a thing, he says, is this beauty of yours if it be not used:—      When forty winters shall besiege thy brow     And dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field,     Thy youth’s proud livery, so gazed on now,     Will be a tatter’d weed, of small worth held:     Then being ask’d where all thy beauty lies,     Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,     To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes,     Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
You must create something in art: my verse ‘is thine, and _born_ of thee’; only listen to me, and I will ‘_bring forth_ eternal numbers to outlive long date,’ and you shall people with forms of your own image the imaginary world of the stage.
These children that you beget, he continues, will not wither away, as mortal children do, but you shall live in them and in my plays: do but—      Make thee another self, for love of me,     That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
I collected all the passages that seemed to me to corroborate this view, and they produced a strong impression on me, and showed me how complete Cyril Graham’s theory really was.
I also saw that it was quite easy to separate those lines in which he speaks of the Sonnets themselves from those in which he speaks of his great dramatic work.
This was a point that had been entirely overlooked by all critics up to Cyril Graham’s day.
And yet it was one of the most important points in the whole series of poems.
To the Sonnets Shakespeare was more or less indifferent.
He did not wish to rest his fame on them.
They were to him his ‘slight Muse,’ as he calls them, and intended, as Meres tells us, for private circulation only among a few, a very few, friends.
Upon the other hand he was extremely conscious of the high artistic value of his plays, and shows a noble self-reliance upon his dramatic genius.
When he says to Willie Hughes:      But thy eternal summer shall not fade,     Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;     Nor shall Death brag thou wander’st in his shade,     When in _eternal lines_ to time thou grow’st:     So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,     So long lives this, and this gives life to thee;—  the expression ‘eternal lines’ clearly alludes to one of his plays that he was sending him at the time, just as the concluding couplet points to his confidence in the probability of his plays being always acted.
In his address to the Dramatic Muse (Sonnets C.
and CI.), we find the same feeling.
Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget’st so long     To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend’st thou thy fury on some worthless song,     Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
he cries, and he then proceeds to reproach the Mistress of Tragedy and Comedy for her ‘neglect of Truth in Beauty dyed,’ and says—      Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, for ‘t lies in thee     To make him much outlive a gilded tomb     And to be praised of ages yet to be.
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how     To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
It is, however, perhaps in the 55th Sonnet that Shakespeare gives to this idea its fullest expression.
To imagine that the ‘powerful rhyme’ of the second line refers to the sonnet itself, is to mistake Shakespeare’s meaning entirely.
It seemed to me that it was extremely likely, from the general character of the sonnet, that a particular play was meant, and that the play was none other but _Romeo and Juliet_.
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments     Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;     But you shall shine more bright in these contents     Than unswept stone besmear’d with sluttish time.
When wasteful wars shall statues overturn,     And broils root out the work of masonry,     Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn     The living record of your memory.
‘Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity     Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room     Even in the eyes of all posterity     That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So, till the judgement that yourself arise,     You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.
It was also extremely suggestive to note how here as elsewhere Shakespeare promised Willie Hughes immortality in a form that appealed to men’s eyes—that is to say, in a spectacular form, in a play that is to be looked at.
For two weeks I worked hard at the Sonnets, hardly ever going out, and refusing all invitations.
Every day I seemed to be discovering something new, and Willie Hughes became to me a kind of spiritual presence, an ever-dominant personality.
I could almost fancy that I saw him standing in the shadow of my room, so well had Shakespeare drawn him, with his golden hair, his tender flower-like grace, his dreamy deep-sunken eyes, his delicate mobile limbs, and his white lily hands.
His very name fascinated me.
Willie Hughes!  Willie Hughes!  How musically it sounded! Yes; who else but he could have been the master-mistress of Shakespeare’s passion, {1} the lord of his love to whom he was bound in vassalage, {2} the delicate minion of pleasure, {3} the rose of the whole world, {4} the herald of the spring {5} decked in the proud livery of youth, {6} the lovely boy whom it was sweet music to hear, {7} and whose beauty was the very raiment of Shakespeare’s heart, {8} as it was the keystone of his dramatic power?
How bitter now seemed the whole tragedy of his desertion and his shame!—shame that he made sweet and lovely {9} by the mere magic of his personality, but that was none the less shame.
Yet as Shakespeare forgave him, should not we forgive him also?
I did not care to pry into the mystery of his sin.
His abandonment of Shakespeare’s theatre was a different matter, and I investigated it at great length.
Finally I came to the conclusion that Cyril Graham had been wrong in regarding the rival dramatist of the 80th Sonnet as Chapman.
It was obviously Marlowe who was alluded to.
At the time the Sonnets were written, such an expression as ‘the proud full sail of his great verse’ could not have been used of Chapman’s work, however applicable it might have been to the style of his later Jacobean plays.
No: Marlowe was clearly the rival dramatist of whom Shakespeare spoke in such laudatory terms; and that                  Affable familiar ghost     Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,  was the Mephistopheles of his _Doctor Faustus_.
No doubt, Marlowe was fascinated by the beauty and grace of the boy-actor, and lured him away from the Blackfriars Theatre, that he might play the Gaveston of his _Edward II_.
That Shakespeare had the legal right to retain Willie Hughes in his own company is evident from Sonnet LXXXVII., where he says:—      Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,     And like enough thou know’st thy estimate:     The _charter of thy worth_ gives thee releasing;     My _bonds_ in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,     _And so my patent back again is swerving_.
Thyself thou gayest, thy own worth then not knowing,     Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;     So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,     Comes home again, on better judgement making.
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,        In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
But him whom he could not hold by love, he would not hold by force.
Willie Hughes became a member of Lord Pembroke’s company, and, perhaps in the open yard of the Red Bull Tavern, played the part of King Edward’s delicate minion.
On Marlowe’s death, he seems to have returned to Shakespeare, who, whatever his fellow-partners may have thought of the matter, was not slow to forgive the wilfulness and treachery of the young actor.
How well, too, had Shakespeare drawn the temperament of the stage-player! Willie Hughes was one of those      That do not do the thing they most do show,     Who, moving others, are themselves as stone.
He could act love, but could not feel it, could mimic passion without realising it.
In many’s looks the false heart’s history     Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,  but with Willie Hughes it was not so.
‘Heaven,’ says Shakespeare, in a sonnet of mad idolatry—         Heaven in thy creation did decree     That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;     Whate’er thy thoughts or thy heart’s workings be,     Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
In his ‘inconstant mind’ and his ‘false heart,’ it was easy to recognise the insincerity and treachery that somehow seem inseparable from the artistic nature, as in his love of praise that desire for immediate recognition that characterises all actors.
And yet, more fortunate in this than other actors, Willie Hughes was to know something of immortality.
Inseparably connected with Shakespeare’s plays, he was to live in them.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,     Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:     The earth can yield me but a common grave,     When you entombed in men’s eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,     Which eyes not yet created shall o’er-read,     And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,     When all the breathers of this world are dead.
There were endless allusions, also, to Willie Hughes’s power over his audience—the ‘gazers,’ as Shakespeare calls them; but perhaps the most perfect description of his wonderful mastery over dramatic art was in _A Lover’s Complaint_, where Shakespeare says of him:—      In him a plenitude of subtle matter,     Applied to cautels, all strange forms receives,     Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,     Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,     In either’s aptness, as it best deceives,     To blush at speeches rank, to weep at woes,     Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows.
* * * * *      So on the tip of his subduing tongue,     All kind of arguments and questions deep,     All replication prompt and reason strong,     For his advantage still did wake and sleep,     To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep.
He had the dialect and the different skill,        Catching all passions in his craft of will.
Once I thought that I had really found Willie Hughes in Elizabethan literature.
In a wonderfully graphic account of the last days of the great Earl of Essex, his chaplain, Thomas Knell, tells us that the night before the Earl died, ‘he called William Hewes, which was his musician, to play upon the virginals and to sing.
“Play,” said he, “my song, Will Hewes, and I will sing it to myself.”  So he did it most joyfully, not as the howling swan, which, still looking down, waileth her end, but as a sweet lark, lifting up his hands and casting up his eyes to his God, with this mounted the crystal skies, and reached with his unwearied tongue the top of highest heavens.’  Surely the boy who played on the virginals to the dying father of Sidney’s Stella was none other but the Will Hews to whom Shakespeare dedicated the Sonnets, and who he tells us was himself sweet ‘music to hear.’  Yet Lord Essex died in 1576, when Shakespeare himself was but twelve years of age.
It was impossible that his musician could have been the Mr. W.
H.
of the Sonnets.
Perhaps Shakespeare’s young friend was the son of the player upon the virginals?
It was at least something to have discovered that Will Hews was an Elizabethan name.
Indeed the name Hews seemed to have been closely connected with music and the stage.
The first English actress was the lovely Margaret Hews, whom Prince Rupert so madly loved.
What more probable than that between her and Lord Essex’s musician had come the boy-actor of Shakespeare’s plays?
But the proofs, the links—where were they?
Alas! I could not find them.
It seemed to me that I was always on the brink of absolute verification, but that I could never really attain to it.
From Willie Hughes’s life I soon passed to thoughts of his death.
I used to wonder what had been his end.
Perhaps he had been one of those English actors who in 1604 went across sea to Germany and played before the great Duke Henry Julius of Brunswick, himself a dramatist of no mean order, and at the Court of that strange Elector of Brandenburg, who was so enamoured of beauty that he was said to have bought for his weight in amber the young son of a travelling Greek merchant, and to have given pageants in honour of his slave all through that dreadful famine year of 1606–7, when the people died of hunger in the very streets of the town, and for the space of seven months there was no rain.
We know at any rate that _Romeo and Juliet_ was brought out at Dresden in 1613, along with _Hamlet_ and _King Lear_, and it was surely to none other than Willie Hughes that in 1615 the death-mask of Shakespeare was brought by the hand of one of the suite of the English ambassador, pale token of the passing away of the great poet who had so dearly loved him.
Indeed there would have been something peculiarly fitting in the idea that the boy-actor, whose beauty had been so vital an element in the realism and romance of Shakespeare’s art, should have been the first to have brought to Germany the seed of the new culture, and was in his way the precursor of that _Aufklärung_ or Illumination of the eighteenth century, that splendid movement which, though begun by Lessing and Herder, and brought to its full and perfect issue by Goethe, was in no small part helped on by another actor—Friedrich Schroeder—who awoke the popular consciousness, and by means of the feigned passions and mimetic methods of the stage showed the intimate, the vital, connection between life and literature.
If this was so—and there was certainly no evidence against it—it was not improbable that Willie Hughes was one of those English comedians (_mimæ quidam ex Britannia_, as the old chronicle calls them), who were slain at Nuremberg in a sudden uprising of the people, and were secretly buried in a little vineyard outside the city by some young men ‘who had found pleasure in their performances, and of whom some had sought to be instructed in the mysteries of the new art.’  Certainly no more fitting place could there be for him to whom Shakespeare said, ‘thou art all my art,’ than this little vineyard outside the city walls.
For was it not from the sorrows of Dionysos that Tragedy sprang?
Was not the light laughter of Comedy, with its careless merriment and quick replies, first heard on the lips of the Sicilian vine-dressers?
Nay, did not the purple and red stain of the wine-froth on face and limbs give the first suggestion of the charm and fascination of disguise—the desire for self-concealment, the sense of the value of objectivity thus showing itself in the rude beginnings of the art?
At any rate, wherever he lay—whether in the little vineyard at the gate of the Gothic town, or in some dim London churchyard amidst the roar and bustle of our great city—no gorgeous monument marked his resting-place.
His true tomb, as Shakespeare saw, was the poet’s verse, his true monument the permanence of the drama.
So had it been with others whose beauty had given a new creative impulse to their age.
The ivory body of the Bithynian slave rots in the green ooze of the Nile, and on the yellow hills of the Cerameicus is strewn the dust of the young Athenian; but Antinous lives in sculpture, and Charmides in philosophy.
AFTER three weeks had elapsed, I determined to make a strong appeal to Erskine to do justice to the memory of Cyril Graham, and to give to the world his marvellous interpretation of the Sonnets—the only interpretation that thoroughly explained the problem.
I have not any copy of my letter, I regret to say, nor have I been able to lay my hand upon the original; but I remember that I went over the whole ground, and covered sheets of paper with passionate reiteration of the arguments and proofs that my study had suggested to me.
It seemed to me that I was not merely restoring Cyril Graham to his proper place in literary history, but rescuing the honour of Shakespeare himself from the tedious memory of a commonplace intrigue.
I put into the letter all my enthusiasm.
I put into the letter all my faith.
No sooner, in fact, had I sent it off than a curious reaction came over me.
It seemed to me that I had given away my capacity for belief in the Willie Hughes theory of the Sonnets, that something had gone out of me, as it were, and that I was perfectly indifferent to the whole subject.
What was it that had happened?
It is difficult to say.
Perhaps, by finding perfect expression for a passion, I had exhausted the passion itself.
Emotional forces, like the forces of physical life, have their positive limitations.
Perhaps the mere effort to convert any one to a theory involves some form of renunciation of the power of credence.
Perhaps I was simply tired of the whole thing, and, my enthusiasm having burnt out, my reason was left to its own unimpassioned judgment.
However it came about, and I cannot pretend to explain it, there was no doubt that Willie Hughes suddenly became to me a mere myth, an idle dream, the boyish fancy of a young man who, like most ardent spirits, was more anxious to convince others than to be himself convinced.
As I had said some very unjust and bitter things to Erskine in my letter, I determined to go and see him at once, and to make my apologies to him for my behaviour.
Accordingly, the next morning I drove down to Birdcage Walk, and found Erskine sitting in his library, with the forged picture of Willie Hughes in front of him.
‘My dear Erskine!’ I cried, ‘I have come to apologise to you.’  ‘To apologise to me?’ he said.
‘What for?’  ‘For my letter,’ I answered.
‘You have nothing to regret in your letter,’ he said.
‘On the contrary, you have done me the greatest service in your power.
You have shown me that Cyril Graham’s theory is perfectly sound.’  ‘You don’t mean to say that you believe in Willie Hughes?’ I exclaimed.
‘Why not?’ he rejoined.
‘You have proved the thing to me.
Do you think I cannot estimate the value of evidence?’  ‘But there is no evidence at all,’ I groaned, sinking into a chair.
‘When I wrote to you I was under the influence of a perfectly silly enthusiasm.
I had been touched by the story of Cyril Graham’s death, fascinated by his romantic theory, enthralled by the wonder and novelty of the whole idea.
I see now that the theory is based on a delusion.
The only evidence for the existence of Willie Hughes is that picture in front of you, and the picture is a forgery.
Don’t be carried away by mere sentiment in this matter.
Whatever romance may have to say about the Willie Hughes theory, reason is dead against it.’  ‘I don’t understand you,’ said Erskine, looking at me in amazement.
‘Why, you yourself have convinced me by your letter that Willie Hughes is an absolute reality.
Why have you changed your mind?
Or is all that you have been saying to me merely a joke?’  ‘I cannot explain it to you,’ I rejoined, ‘but I see now that there is really nothing to be said in favour of Cyril Graham’s interpretation.
The Sonnets are addressed to Lord Pembroke.
For heaven’s sake don’t waste your time in a foolish attempt to discover a young Elizabethan actor who never existed, and to make a phantom puppet the centre of the great cycle of Shakespeare’s Sonnets.’  ‘I see that you don’t understand the theory,’ he replied.
‘My dear Erskine,’ I cried, ‘not understand it!  Why, I feel as if I had invented it.
Surely my letter shows you that I not merely went into the whole matter, but that I contributed proofs of every kind.
The one flaw in the theory is that it presupposes the existence of the person whose existence is the subject of dispute.
If we grant that there was in Shakespeare’s company a young actor of the name of Willie Hughes, it is not difficult to make him the object of the Sonnets.
But as we know that there was no actor of this name in the company of the Globe Theatre, it is idle to pursue the investigation further.’  ‘But that is exactly what we don’t know,’ said Erskine.
‘It is quite true that his name does not occur in the list given in the first folio; but, as Cyril pointed out, that is rather a proof in favour of the existence of Willie Hughes than against it, if we remember his treacherous desertion of Shakespeare for a rival dramatist.’  We argued the matter over for hours, but nothing that I could say could make Erskine surrender his faith in Cyril Graham’s interpretation.
He told me that he intended to devote his life to proving the theory, and that he was determined to do justice to Cyril Graham’s memory.
I entreated him, laughed at him, begged of him, but it was of no use.
Finally we parted, not exactly in anger, but certainly with a shadow between us.
He thought me shallow, I thought him foolish.
When I called on him again his servant told me that he had gone to Germany.
Two years afterwards, as I was going into my club, the hall-porter handed me a letter with a foreign postmark.
It was from Erskine, and written at the Hôtel d’Angleterre, Cannes.
When I had read it I was filled with horror, though I did not quite believe that he would be so mad as to carry his resolve into execution.
The gist of the letter was that he had tried in every way to verify the Willie Hughes theory, and had failed, and that as Cyril Graham had given his life for this theory, he himself had determined to give his own life also to the same cause.
The concluding words of the letter were these: ‘I still believe in Willie Hughes; and by the time you receive this, I shall have died by my own hand for Willie Hughes’s sake: for his sake, and for the sake of Cyril Graham, whom I drove to his death by my shallow scepticism and ignorant lack of faith.
The truth was once revealed to you, and you rejected it.
It comes to you now stained with the blood of two lives,—do not turn away from it.’  It was a horrible moment.
I felt sick with misery, and yet I could not believe it.
To die for one’s theological beliefs is the worst use a man can make of his life, but to die for a literary theory!  It seemed impossible.
I looked at the date.
The letter was a week old.
Some unfortunate chance had prevented my going to the club for several days, or I might have got it in time to save him.
Perhaps it was not too late.
I drove off to my rooms, packed up my things, and started by the night-mail from Charing Cross.
The journey was intolerable.
I thought I would never arrive.
As soon as I did I drove to the Hôtel l’Angleterre.
They told me that Erskine had been buried two days before in the English cemetery.
There was something horribly grotesque about the whole tragedy.
I said all kinds of wild things, and the people in the hall looked curiously at me.
Suddenly Lady Erskine, in deep mourning, passed across the vestibule.
When she saw me she came up to me, murmured something about her poor son, and burst into tears.
I led her into her sitting-room.
An elderly gentleman was there waiting for her.
It was the English doctor.
We talked a great deal about Erskine, but I said nothing about his motive for committing suicide.
It was evident that he had not told his mother anything about the reason that had driven him to so fatal, so mad an act.
Finally Lady Erskine rose and said, George left you something as a memento.
It was a thing he prized very much.
I will get it for you.
As soon as she had left the room I turned to the doctor and said, ‘What a dreadful shock it must have been to Lady Erskine!  I wonder that she bears it as well as she does.’  ‘Oh, she knew for months past that it was coming,’ he answered.
‘Knew it for months past!’ I cried.
‘But why didn’t she stop him?
Why didn’t she have him watched?
He must have been mad.’  The doctor stared at me.
‘I don’t know what you mean,’ he said.
‘Well,’ I cried, ‘if a mother knows that her son is going to commit suicide—’  ‘Suicide!’ he answered.
‘Poor Erskine did not commit suicide.
He died of consumption.
He came here to die.
The moment I saw him I knew that there was no hope.
One lung was almost gone, and the other was very much affected.
Three days before he died he asked me was there any hope.
I told him frankly that there was none, and that he had only a few days to live.
He wrote some letters, and was quite resigned, retaining his senses to the last.’  At that moment Lady Erskine entered the room with the fatal picture of Willie Hughes in her hand.
‘When George was dying he begged me to give you this,’ she said.
As I took it from her, her tears fell on my hand.
The picture hangs now in my library, where it is very much admired by my artistic friends.
They have decided that it is not a Clouet, but an Oudry.
I have never cared to tell them its true history.
But sometimes, when I look at it, I think that there is really a great deal to be said for the Willie Hughes theory of Shakespeare’s Sonnets.﻿It was Lady Windermere’s last reception before Easter, and Bentinck House  was even more crowded than usual.
Six Cabinet Ministers had come on from  the Speaker’s Levée in their stars and ribands, all the pretty women wore  their smartest dresses, and at the end of the picture-gallery stood the  Princess Sophia of Carlsrühe, a heavy Tartar-looking lady, with tiny  black eyes and wonderful emeralds, talking bad French at the top of her  voice, and laughing immoderately at everything that was said to her.
It  was certainly a wonderful medley of people.
Gorgeous peeresses chatted  affably to violent Radicals, popular preachers brushed coat-tails with  eminent sceptics, a perfect bevy of bishops kept following a stout  prima-donna from room to room, on the staircase stood several Royal  Academicians, disguised as artists, and it was said that at one time the  supper-room was absolutely crammed with geniuses.
In fact, it was one of  Lady Windermere’s best nights, and the Princess stayed till nearly  half-past eleven.
As soon as she had gone, Lady Windermere returned to the picture-gallery,  where a celebrated political economist was solemnly explaining the  scientific theory of music to an indignant virtuoso from Hungary, and  began to talk to the Duchess of Paisley.
She looked wonderfully  beautiful with her grand ivory throat, her large blue forget-me-not eyes,  and her heavy coils of golden hair.
_Or pur_ they were—not that pale  straw colour that nowadays usurps the gracious name of gold, but such  gold as is woven into sunbeams or hidden in strange amber; and they gave  to her face something of the frame of a saint, with not a little of the  fascination of a sinner.
She was a curious psychological study.
Early  in life she had discovered the important truth that nothing looks so like  innocence as an indiscretion; and by a series of reckless escapades, half  of them quite harmless, she had acquired all the privileges of a  personality.
She had more than once changed her husband; indeed, Debrett  credits her with three marriages; but as she had never changed her lover,  the world had long ago ceased to talk scandal about her.
She was now  forty years of age, childless, and with that inordinate passion for  pleasure which is the secret of remaining young.
Suddenly she looked eagerly round the room, and said, in her clear  contralto voice, ‘Where is my cheiromantist?’    ‘Your what, Gladys?’ exclaimed the Duchess, giving an involuntary start.
‘My cheiromantist, Duchess; I can’t live without him at present.’    ‘Dear Gladys! you are always so original,’ murmured the Duchess, trying  to remember what a cheiromantist really was, and hoping it was not the  same as a cheiropodist.
‘He comes to see my hand twice a week regularly,’ continued Lady  Windermere, ‘and is most interesting about it.’    ‘Good heavens!’ said the Duchess to herself, ‘he is a sort of  cheiropodist after all.
How very dreadful.
I hope he is a foreigner at  any rate.
It wouldn’t be quite so bad then.’    ‘I must certainly introduce him to you.’    ‘Introduce him!’ cried the Duchess; ‘you don’t mean to say he is here?’  and she began looking about for a small tortoise-shell fan and a very  tattered lace shawl, so as to be ready to go at a moment’s notice.
‘Of course he is here; I would not dream of giving a party without him.
He tells me I have a pure psychic hand, and that if my thumb had been the  least little bit shorter, I should have been a confirmed pessimist, and  gone into a convent.’    ‘Oh, I see!’ said the Duchess, feeling very much relieved; ‘he tells  fortunes, I suppose?’    ‘And misfortunes, too,’ answered Lady Windermere, ‘any amount of them.
Next year, for instance, I am in great danger, both by land and sea, so I  am going to live in a balloon, and draw up my dinner in a basket every  evening.
It is all written down on my little finger, or on the palm of  my hand, I forget which.’    ‘But surely that is tempting Providence, Gladys.’    ‘My dear Duchess, surely Providence can resist temptation by this time.
I think every one should have their hands told once a month, so as to  know what not to do.
Of course, one does it all the same, but it is so  pleasant to be warned.
Now if some one doesn’t go and fetch Mr. Podgers  at once, I shall have to go myself.’    ‘Let me go, Lady Windermere,’ said a tall handsome young man, who was  standing by, listening to the conversation with an amused smile.
‘Thanks so much, Lord Arthur; but I am afraid you wouldn’t recognise  him.’    ‘If he is as wonderful as you say, Lady Windermere, I couldn’t well miss  him.
Tell me what he is like, and I’ll bring him to you at once.’    ‘Well, he is not a bit like a cheiromantist.
I mean he is not  mysterious, or esoteric, or romantic-looking.
He is a little, stout man,  with a funny, bald head, and great gold-rimmed spectacles; something  between a family doctor and a country attorney.
I’m really very sorry,  but it is not my fault.
People are so annoying.
All my pianists look  exactly like poets, and all my poets look exactly like pianists; and I  remember last season asking a most dreadful conspirator to dinner, a man  who had blown up ever so many people, and always wore a coat of mail, and  carried a dagger up his shirt-sleeve; and do you know that when he came  he looked just like a nice old clergyman, and cracked jokes all the  evening?
Of course, he was very amusing, and all that, but I was awfully  disappointed; and when I asked him about the coat of mail, he only  laughed, and said it was far too cold to wear in England.
Ah, here is  Mr. Podgers!  Now, Mr. Podgers, I want you to tell the Duchess of  Paisley’s hand.
Duchess, you must take your glove off.
No, not the left  hand, the other.’    ‘Dear Gladys, I really don’t think it is quite right,’ said the Duchess,  feebly unbuttoning a rather soiled kid glove.
‘Nothing interesting ever is,’ said Lady Windermere: ‘_on a fait le monde  ainsi_.
But I must introduce you.
Duchess, this is Mr. Podgers, my pet  cheiromantist.
Mr. Podgers, this is the Duchess of Paisley, and if you  say that she has a larger mountain of the moon than I have, I will never  believe in you again.’    ‘I am sure, Gladys, there is nothing of the kind in my hand,’ said the  Duchess gravely.
‘Your Grace is quite right,’ said Mr. Podgers, glancing at the little fat  hand with its short square fingers, ‘the mountain of the moon is not  developed.
The line of life, however, is excellent.
Kindly bend the  wrist.
Thank you.
Three distinct lines on the _rascette_!  You will  live to a great age, Duchess, and be extremely happy.
Ambition—very  moderate, line of intellect not exaggerated, line of heart—’    ‘Now, do be indiscreet, Mr. Podgers,’ cried Lady Windermere.
‘Nothing would give me greater pleasure,’ said Mr. Podgers, bowing, ‘if  the Duchess ever had been, but I am sorry to say that I see great  permanence of affection, combined with a strong sense of duty.’    ‘Pray go on, Mr. Podgers,’ said the Duchess, looking quite pleased.
‘Economy is not the least of your Grace’s virtues,’ continued Mr.  Podgers, and Lady Windermere went off into fits of laughter.
‘Economy is a very good thing,’ remarked the Duchess complacently; ‘when  I married Paisley he had eleven castles, and not a single house fit to  live in.’    ‘And now he has twelve houses, and not a single castle,’ cried Lady  Windermere.
‘Well, my dear,’ said the Duchess, ‘I like—’    ‘Comfort,’ said Mr. Podgers, ‘and modern improvements, and hot water laid  on in every bedroom.
Your Grace is quite right.
Comfort is the only  thing our civilisation can give us.
‘You have told the Duchess’s character admirably, Mr. Podgers, and now  you must tell Lady Flora’s’; and in answer to a nod from the smiling  hostess, a tall girl, with sandy Scotch hair, and high shoulder-blades,  stepped awkwardly from behind the sofa, and held out a long, bony hand  with spatulate fingers.
‘Ah, a pianist! I see,’ said Mr. Podgers, ‘an excellent pianist, but  perhaps hardly a musician.
Very reserved, very honest, and with a great  love of animals.’    ‘Quite true!’ exclaimed the Duchess, turning to Lady Windermere,  ‘absolutely true!  Flora keeps two dozen collie dogs at Macloskie, and  would turn our town house into a menagerie if her father would let her.’    ‘Well, that is just what I do with my house every Thursday evening,’  cried Lady Windermere, laughing, ‘only I like lions better than collie  dogs.’    ‘Your one mistake, Lady Windermere,’ said Mr. Podgers, with a pompous  bow.
‘If a woman can’t make her mistakes charming, she is only a female,’ was  the answer.
‘But you must read some more hands for us.
Come, Sir  Thomas, show Mr. Podgers yours’; and a genial-looking old gentleman, in a  white waistcoat, came forward, and held out a thick rugged hand, with a  very long third finger.
‘An adventurous nature; four long voyages in the past, and one to come.
Been ship-wrecked three times.
No, only twice, but in danger of a  shipwreck your next journey.
A strong Conservative, very punctual, and  with a passion for collecting curiosities.
Had a severe illness between  the ages sixteen and eighteen.
Was left a fortune when about thirty.
Great aversion to cats and Radicals.’    ‘Extraordinary!’ exclaimed Sir Thomas; ‘you must really tell my wife’s  hand, too.’    ‘Your second wife’s,’ said Mr. Podgers quietly, still keeping Sir  Thomas’s hand in his.
‘Your second wife’s.
I shall be charmed’; but  Lady Marvel, a melancholy-looking woman, with brown hair and sentimental  eyelashes, entirely declined to have her past or her future exposed; and  nothing that Lady Windermere could do would induce Monsieur de Koloff,  the Russian Ambassador, even to take his gloves off.
In fact, many  people seemed afraid to face the odd little man with his stereotyped  smile, his gold spectacles, and his bright, beady eyes; and when he told  poor Lady Fermor, right out before every one, that she did not care a bit  for music, but was extremely fond of musicians, it was generally felt  that cheiromancy was a most dangerous science, and one that ought not to  be encouraged, except in a _tête-à-tête_.
Lord Arthur Savile, however, who did not know anything about Lady  Fermor’s unfortunate story, and who had been watching Mr. Podgers with a  great deal of interest, was filled with an immense curiosity to have his  own hand read, and feeling somewhat shy about putting himself forward,  crossed over the room to where Lady Windermere was sitting, and, with a  charming blush, asked her if she thought Mr. Podgers would mind.
‘Of course, he won’t mind,’ said Lady Windermere, ‘that is what he is  here for.
All my lions, Lord Arthur, are performing lions, and jump  through hoops whenever I ask them.
But I must warn you beforehand that I  shall tell Sybil everything.
She is coming to lunch with me to-morrow,  to talk about bonnets, and if Mr. Podgers finds out that you have a bad  temper, or a tendency to gout, or a wife living in Bayswater, I shall  certainly let her know all about it.’    Lord Arthur smiled, and shook his head.
‘I am not afraid,’ he answered.
‘Sybil knows me as well as I know her.’    ‘Ah!  I am a little sorry to hear you say that.
The proper basis for  marriage is a mutual misunderstanding.
No, I am not at all cynical, I  have merely got experience, which, however, is very much the same thing.
Mr. Podgers, Lord Arthur Savile is dying to have his hand read.
Don’t  tell him that he is engaged to one of the most beautiful girls in London,  because that appeared in the _Morning Post_ a month ago.
‘Dear Lady Windermere,’ cried the Marchioness of Jedburgh, ‘do let Mr.  Podgers stay here a little longer.
He has just told me I should go on  the stage, and I am so interested.’    ‘If he has told you that, Lady Jedburgh, I shall certainly take him away.
Come over at once, Mr. Podgers, and read Lord Arthur’s hand.’    ‘Well,’ said Lady Jedburgh, making a little _moue_ as she rose from the  sofa, ‘if I am not to be allowed to go on the stage, I must be allowed to  be part of the audience at any rate.’    ‘Of course; we are all going to be part of the audience,’ said Lady  Windermere; ‘and now, Mr. Podgers, be sure and tell us something nice.
Lord Arthur is one of my special favourites.’    But when Mr. Podgers saw Lord Arthur’s hand he grew curiously pale, and  said nothing.
A shudder seemed to pass through him, and his great bushy  eyebrows twitched convulsively, in an odd, irritating way they had when  he was puzzled.
Then some huge beads of perspiration broke out on his  yellow forehead, like a poisonous dew, and his fat fingers grew cold and  clammy.
Lord Arthur did not fail to notice these strange signs of agitation, and,  for the first time in his life, he himself felt fear.
His impulse was to  rush from the room, but he restrained himself.
It was better to know the  worst, whatever it was, than to be left in this hideous uncertainty.
‘I am waiting, Mr. Podgers,’ he said.
‘We are all waiting,’ cried Lady Windermere, in her quick, impatient  manner, but the cheiromantist made no reply.
‘I believe Arthur is going on the stage,’ said Lady Jedburgh, ‘and that,  after your scolding, Mr. Podgers is afraid to tell him so.’    Suddenly Mr. Podgers dropped Lord Arthur’s right hand, and seized hold of  his left, bending down so low to examine it that the gold rims of his  spectacles seemed almost to touch the palm.
For a moment his face became  a white mask of horror, but he soon recovered his _sang-froid_, and  looking up at Lady Windermere, said with a forced smile, ‘It is the hand  of a charming young man.
‘Of course it is!’ answered Lady Windermere, ‘but will he be a charming  husband?
That is what I want to know.’    ‘All charming young men are,’ said Mr. Podgers.
‘I don’t think a husband should be too fascinating,’ murmured Lady  Jedburgh pensively, ‘it is so dangerous.’    ‘My dear child, they never are too fascinating,’ cried Lady Windermere.
‘But what I want are details.
Details are the only things that interest.
What is going to happen to Lord Arthur?’    ‘Well, within the next few months Lord Arthur will go a voyage—’    ‘Oh yes, his honeymoon, of course!’    ‘And lose a relative.’    ‘Not his sister, I hope?’ said Lady Jedburgh, in a piteous tone of voice.
‘Certainly not his sister,’ answered Mr. Podgers, with a deprecating wave  of the hand, ‘a distant relative merely.’    ‘Well, I am dreadfully disappointed,’ said Lady Windermere.
‘I have  absolutely nothing to tell Sybil to-morrow.
No one cares about distant  relatives nowadays.
They went out of fashion years ago.
However, I  suppose she had better have a black silk by her; it always does for  church, you know.
And now let us go to supper.
They are sure to have  eaten everything up, but we may find some hot soup.
François used to  make excellent soup once, but he is so agitated about politics at  present, that I never feel quite certain about him.
I do wish General  Boulanger would keep quiet.
Duchess, I am sure you are tired?’    ‘Not at all, dear Gladys,’ answered the Duchess, waddling towards the  door.
‘I have enjoyed myself immensely, and the cheiropodist, I mean the  cheiromantist, is most interesting.
Flora, where can my tortoise-shell  fan be?
Oh, thank you, Sir Thomas, so much.
And my lace shawl, Flora?
Oh, thank you, Sir Thomas, very kind, I’m sure’; and the worthy creature  finally managed to get downstairs without dropping her scent-bottle more  than twice.
All this time Lord Arthur Savile had remained standing by the fireplace,  with the same feeling of dread over him, the same sickening sense of  coming evil.
He smiled sadly at his sister, as she swept past him on  Lord Plymdale’s arm, looking lovely in her pink brocade and pearls, and  he hardly heard Lady Windermere when she called to him to follow her.
He  thought of Sybil Merton, and the idea that anything could come between  them made his eyes dim with tears.
Looking at him, one would have said that Nemesis had stolen the shield of  Pallas, and shown him the Gorgon’s head.
He seemed turned to stone, and  his face was like marble in its melancholy.
He had lived the delicate  and luxurious life of a young man of birth and fortune, a life exquisite  in its freedom from sordid care, its beautiful boyish insouciance; and  now for the first time he became conscious of the terrible mystery of  Destiny, of the awful meaning of Doom.
How mad and monstrous it all seemed!  Could it be that written on his  hand, in characters that he could not read himself, but that another  could decipher, was some fearful secret of sin, some blood-red sign of  crime?
Was there no escape possible?
Were we no better than chessmen,  moved by an unseen power, vessels the potter fashions at his fancy, for  honour or for shame?
His reason revolted against it, and yet he felt  that some tragedy was hanging over him, and that he had been suddenly  called upon to bear an intolerable burden.
Actors are so fortunate.
They can choose whether they will appear in tragedy or in comedy, whether  they will suffer or make merry, laugh or shed tears.
But in real life it  is different.
Most men and women are forced to perform parts for which  they have no qualifications.
Our Guildensterns play Hamlet for us, and  our Hamlets have to jest like Prince Hal.
The world is a stage, but the  play is badly cast.
Suddenly Mr. Podgers entered the room.
When he saw Lord Arthur he  started, and his coarse, fat face became a sort of greenish-yellow  colour.
The two men’s eyes met, and for a moment there was silence.
‘The Duchess has left one of her gloves here, Lord Arthur, and has asked  me to bring it to her,’ said Mr. Podgers finally.
‘Ah, I see it on the  sofa!  Good evening.’    ‘Mr. Podgers, I must insist on your giving me a straightforward answer to  a question I am going to put to you.’    ‘Another time, Lord Arthur, but the Duchess is anxious.
I am afraid I  must go.’    ‘You shall not go.
The Duchess is in no hurry.’    ‘Ladies should not be kept waiting, Lord Arthur,’ said Mr. Podgers, with  his sickly smile.
‘The fair sex is apt to be impatient.’    Lord Arthur’s finely-chiselled lips curled in petulant disdain.
The poor  Duchess seemed to him of very little importance at that moment.
He  walked across the room to where Mr. Podgers was standing, and held his  hand out.
‘Tell me what you saw there,’ he said.
‘Tell me the truth.
I must know  it.
I am not a child.’    Mr. Podgers’s eyes blinked behind his gold-rimmed spectacles, and he  moved uneasily from one foot to the other, while his fingers played  nervously with a flash watch-chain.
‘What makes you think that I saw anything in your hand, Lord Arthur, more  than I told you?’    ‘I know you did, and I insist on your telling me what it was.
I will pay  you.
I will give you a cheque for a hundred pounds.’    The green eyes flashed for a moment, and then became dull again.
‘Guineas?’ said Mr. Podgers at last, in a low voice.
‘Certainly.
I will send you a cheque to-morrow.
What is your club?’    ‘I have no club.
That is to say, not just at present.
My address is—,  but allow me to give you my card’; and producing a bit of gilt-edge  pasteboard from his waistcoat pocket, Mr. Podgers handed it, with a low  bow, to Lord Arthur, who read on it,                              _Mr. SEPTIMUS R.
PODGERS_                           _Professional Cheiromantist_                            103_a_ _West Moon Street_    ‘My hours are from ten to four,’ murmured Mr. Podgers mechanically, ‘and  I make a reduction for families.’    ‘Be quick,’ cried Lord Arthur, looking very pale, and holding his hand  out.
Mr. Podgers glanced nervously round, and drew the heavy _portière_ across  the door.
‘It will take a little time, Lord Arthur, you had better sit down.’    ‘Be quick, sir,’ cried Lord Arthur again, stamping his foot angrily on  the polished floor.
Mr. Podgers smiled, drew from his breast-pocket a small magnifying glass,  and wiped it carefully with his handkerchief.
‘I am quite ready,’ he said.
TEN minutes later, with face blanched by terror, and eyes wild with  grief, Lord Arthur Savile rushed from Bentinck House, crushing his way  through the crowd of fur-coated footmen that stood round the large  striped awning, and seeming not to see or hear anything.
The night was  bitter cold, and the gas-lamps round the square flared and flickered in  the keen wind; but his hands were hot with fever, and his forehead burned  like fire.
On and on he went, almost with the gait of a drunken man.
A  policeman looked curiously at him as he passed, and a beggar, who  slouched from an archway to ask for alms, grew frightened, seeing misery  greater than his own.
Once he stopped under a lamp, and looked at his  hands.
He thought he could detect the stain of blood already upon them,  and a faint cry broke from his trembling lips.
Murder! that is what the cheiromantist had seen there.
Murder!  The very  night seemed to know it, and the desolate wind to howl it in his ear.
The dark corners of the streets were full of it.
It grinned at him from  the roofs of the houses.
First he came to the Park, whose sombre woodland seemed to fascinate him.
He leaned wearily up against the railings, cooling his brow against the  wet metal, and listening to the tremulous silence of the trees.
‘Murder!  murder!’ he kept repeating, as though iteration could dim the horror of  the word.
The sound of his own voice made him shudder, yet he almost  hoped that Echo might hear him, and wake the slumbering city from its  dreams.
He felt a mad desire to stop the casual passer-by, and tell him  everything.
Then he wandered across Oxford Street into narrow, shameful alleys.
Two  women with painted faces mocked at him as he went by.
From a dark  courtyard came a sound of oaths and blows, followed by shrill screams,  and, huddled upon a damp door-step, he saw the crook-backed forms of  poverty and eld.
A strange pity came over him.
Were these children of  sin and misery predestined to their end, as he to his?
Were they, like  him, merely the puppets of a monstrous show?
And yet it was not the mystery, but the comedy of suffering that struck  him; its absolute uselessness, its grotesque want of meaning.
How  incoherent everything seemed!  How lacking in all harmony!  He was amazed  at the discord between the shallow optimism of the day, and the real  facts of existence.
He was still very young.
After a time he found himself in front of Marylebone Church.
The silent  roadway looked like a long riband of polished silver, flecked here and  there by the dark arabesques of waving shadows.
Far into the distance  curved the line of flickering gas-lamps, and outside a little walled-in  house stood a solitary hansom, the driver asleep inside.
He walked  hastily in the direction of Portland Place, now and then looking round,  as though he feared that he was being followed.
At the corner of Rich  Street stood two men, reading a small bill upon a hoarding.
An odd  feeling of curiosity stirred him, and he crossed over.
As he came near,  the word ‘Murder,’ printed in black letters, met his eye.
He started,  and a deep flush came into his cheek.
It was an advertisement offering a  reward for any information leading to the arrest of a man of medium  height, between thirty and forty years of age, wearing a billy-cock hat,  a black coat, and check trousers, and with a scar upon his right cheek.
He read it over and over again, and wondered if the wretched man would be  caught, and how he had been scarred.
Perhaps, some day, his own name  might be placarded on the walls of London.
Some day, perhaps, a price  would be set on his head also.
The thought made him sick with horror.
He turned on his heel, and  hurried on into the night.
Where he went he hardly knew.
He had a dim memory of wandering through a  labyrinth of sordid houses, of being lost in a giant web of sombre  streets, and it was bright dawn when he found himself at last in  Piccadilly Circus.
As he strolled home towards Belgrave Square, he met  the great waggons on their way to Covent Garden.
The white-smocked  carters, with their pleasant sunburnt faces and coarse curly hair, strode  sturdily on, cracking their whips, and calling out now and then to each  other; on the back of a huge grey horse, the leader of a jangling team,  sat a chubby boy, with a bunch of primroses in his battered hat, keeping  tight hold of the mane with his little hands, and laughing; and the great  piles of vegetables looked like masses of jade against the morning sky,  like masses of green jade against the pink petals of some marvellous  rose.
Lord Arthur felt curiously affected, he could not tell why.
There  was something in the dawn’s delicate loveliness that seemed to him  inexpressibly pathetic, and he thought of all the days that break in  beauty, and that set in storm.
These rustics, too, with their rough,  good-humoured voices, and their nonchalant ways, what a strange London  they saw!  A London free from the sin of night and the smoke of day, a  pallid, ghost-like city, a desolate town of tombs!  He wondered what they  thought of it, and whether they knew anything of its splendour and its  shame, of its fierce, fiery-coloured joys, and its horrible hunger, of  all it makes and mars from morn to eve.
Probably it was to them merely a  mart where they brought their fruits to sell, and where they tarried for  a few hours at most, leaving the streets still silent, the houses still  asleep.
It gave him pleasure to watch them as they went by.
Rude as  they were, with their heavy, hob-nailed shoes, and their awkward gait,  they brought a little of a ready with them.
He felt that they had lived  with Nature, and that she had taught them peace.
He envied them all that  they did not know.
By the time he had reached Belgrave Square the sky was a faint blue, and  the birds were beginning to twitter in the gardens.
WHEN Lord Arthur woke it was twelve o’clock, and the midday sun was  streaming through the ivory-silk curtains of his room.
He got up and  looked out of the window.
A dim haze of heat was hanging over the great  city, and the roofs of the houses were like dull silver.
In the  flickering green of the square below some children were flitting about  like white butterflies, and the pavement was crowded with people on their  way to the Park.
Never had life seemed lovelier to him, never had the  things of evil seemed more remote.
Then his valet brought him a cup of chocolate on a tray.
After he had  drunk it, he drew aside a heavy _portière_ of peach-coloured plush, and  passed into the bathroom.
The light stole softly from above, through  thin slabs of transparent onyx, and the water in the marble tank  glimmered like a moonstone.
He plunged hastily in, till the cool ripples  touched throat and hair, and then dipped his head right under, as though  he would have wiped away the stain of some shameful memory.
When he  stepped out he felt almost at peace.
The exquisite physical conditions  of the moment had dominated him, as indeed often happens in the case of  very finely-wrought natures, for the senses, like fire, can purify as  well as destroy.
After breakfast, he flung himself down on a divan, and lit a cigarette.
On the mantel-shelf, framed in dainty old brocade, stood a large  photograph of Sybil Merton, as he had seen her first at Lady Noel’s ball.
The small, exquisitely-shaped head drooped slightly to one side, as  though the thin, reed-like throat could hardly bear the burden of so much  beauty; the lips were slightly parted, and seemed made for sweet music;  and all the tender purity of girlhood looked out in wonder from the  dreaming eyes.
With her soft, clinging dress of _crêpe-de-chine_, and  her large leaf-shaped fan, she looked like one of those delicate little  figures men find in the olive-woods near Tanagra; and there was a touch  of Greek grace in her pose and attitude.
Yet she was not _petite_.
She  was simply perfectly proportioned—a rare thing in an age when so many  women are either over life-size or insignificant.
Now as Lord Arthur looked at her, he was filled with the terrible pity  that is born of love.
He felt that to marry her, with the doom of murder  hanging over his head, would be a betrayal like that of Judas, a sin  worse than any the Borgia had ever dreamed of.
What happiness could  there be for them, when at any moment he might be called upon to carry  out the awful prophecy written in his hand?
What manner of life would be  theirs while Fate still held this fearful fortune in the scales?
The  marriage must be postponed, at all costs.
Of this he was quite resolved.
Ardently though he loved the girl, and the mere touch of her fingers,  when they sat together, made each nerve of his body thrill with exquisite  joy, he recognised none the less clearly where his duty lay, and was  fully conscious of the fact that he had no right to marry until he had  committed the murder.
This done, he could stand before the altar with  Sybil Merton, and give his life into her hands without terror of  wrongdoing.
This done, he could take her to his arms, knowing that she  would never have to blush for him, never have to hang her head in shame.
But done it must be first; and the sooner the better for both.
Many men in his position would have preferred the primrose path of  dalliance to the steep heights of duty; but Lord Arthur was too  conscientious to set pleasure above principle.
There was more than mere  passion in his love; and Sybil was to him a symbol of all that is good  and noble.
For a moment he had a natural repugnance against what he was  asked to do, but it soon passed away.
His heart told him that it was not  a sin, but a sacrifice; his reason reminded him that there was no other  course open.
He had to choose between living for himself and living for  others, and terrible though the task laid upon him undoubtedly was, yet  he knew that he must not suffer selfishness to triumph over love.
Sooner  or later we are all called upon to decide on the same issue—of us all,  the same question is asked.
To Lord Arthur it came early in life—before  his nature had been spoiled by the calculating cynicism of middle-age, or  his heart corroded by the shallow, fashionable egotism of our day, and he  felt no hesitation about doing his duty.
Fortunately also, for him, he  was no mere dreamer, or idle dilettante.
Had he been so, he would have  hesitated, like Hamlet, and let irresolution mar his purpose.
But he was  essentially practical.
Life to him meant action, rather than thought.
He had that rarest of all things, common sense.
The wild, turbid feelings of the previous night had by this time  completely passed away, and it was almost with a sense of shame that he  looked back upon his mad wanderings from street to street, his fierce  emotional agony.
The very sincerity of his sufferings made them seem  unreal to him now.
He wondered how he could have been so foolish as to  rant and rave about the inevitable.
The only question that seemed to  trouble him was, whom to make away with; for he was not blind to the fact  that murder, like the religions of the Pagan world, requires a victim as  well as a priest.
Not being a genius, he had no enemies, and indeed he  felt that this was not the time for the gratification of any personal  pique or dislike, the mission in which he was engaged being one of great  and grave solemnity.
He accordingly made out a list of his friends and  relatives on a sheet of notepaper, and after careful consideration,  decided in favour of Lady Clementina Beauchamp, a dear old lady who lived  in Curzon Street, and was his own second cousin by his mother’s side.
He  had always been very fond of Lady Clem, as every one called her, and as  he was very wealthy himself, having come into all Lord Rugby’s property  when he came of age, there was no possibility of his deriving any vulgar  monetary advantage by her death.
In fact, the more he thought over the  matter, the more she seemed to him to be just the right person, and,  feeling that any delay would be unfair to Sybil, he determined to make  his arrangements at once.
The first thing to be done was, of course, to settle with the  cheiromantist; so he sat down at a small Sheraton writing-table that  stood near the window, drew a cheque for £105, payable to the order of  Mr. Septimus Podgers, and, enclosing it in an envelope, told his valet to  take it to West Moon Street.
He then telephoned to the stables for his  hansom, and dressed to go out.
As he was leaving the room he looked back  at Sybil Merton’s photograph, and swore that, come what may, he would  never let her know what he was doing for her sake, but would keep the  secret of his self-sacrifice hidden always in his heart.
On his way to the Buckingham, he stopped at a florist’s, and sent Sybil a  beautiful basket of narcissus, with lovely white petals and staring  pheasants’ eyes, and on arriving at the club, went straight to the  library, rang the bell, and ordered the waiter to bring him a  lemon-and-soda, and a book on Toxicology.
He had fully decided that  poison was the best means to adopt in this troublesome business.
Anything like personal violence was extremely distasteful to him, and  besides, he was very anxious not to murder Lady Clementina in any way  that might attract public attention, as he hated the idea of being  lionised at Lady Windermere’s, or seeing his name figuring in the  paragraphs of vulgar society—newspapers.
He had also to think of Sybil’s  father and mother, who were rather old-fashioned people, and might  possibly object to the marriage if there was anything like a scandal,  though he felt certain that if he told them the whole facts of the case  they would be the very first to appreciate the motives that had actuated  him.
He had every reason, then, to decide in favour of poison.
It was  safe, sure, and quiet, and did away with any necessity for painful  scenes, to which, like most Englishmen, he had a rooted objection.
Of the science of poisons, however, he knew absolutely nothing, and as  the waiter seemed quite unable to find anything in the library but  _Ruff’s Guide_ and _Bailey’s Magazine_, he examined the book-shelves  himself, and finally came across a handsomely-bound edition of the  _Pharmacopoeia_, and a copy of Erskine’s _Toxicology_, edited by Sir  Mathew Reid, the President of the Royal College of Physicians, and one of  the oldest members of the Buckingham, having been elected in mistake for  somebody else; a _contretemps_ that so enraged the Committee, that when  the real man came up they black-balled him unanimously.
Lord Arthur was  a good deal puzzled at the technical terms used in both books, and had  begun to regret that he had not paid more attention to his classics at  Oxford, when in the second volume of Erskine, he found a very interesting  and complete account of the properties of aconitine, written in fairly  clear English.
It seemed to him to be exactly the poison he wanted.
It  was swift—indeed, almost immediate, in its effect—perfectly painless, and  when taken in the form of a gelatine capsule, the mode recommended by Sir  Mathew, not by any means unpalatable.
He accordingly made a note, upon  his shirt-cuff, of the amount necessary for a fatal dose, put the books  back in their places, and strolled up St. James’s Street, to Pestle and  Humbey’s, the great chemists.
Mr. Pestle, who always attended personally  on the aristocracy, was a good deal surprised at the order, and in a very  deferential manner murmured something about a medical certificate being  necessary.
However, as soon as Lord Arthur explained to him that it was  for a large Norwegian mastiff that he was obliged to get rid of, as it  showed signs of incipient rabies, and had already bitten the coachman  twice in the calf of the leg, he expressed himself as being perfectly  satisfied, complimented Lord Arthur on his wonderful knowledge of  Toxicology, and had the prescription made up immediately.
Lord Arthur put the capsule into a pretty little silver _bonbonnière_  that he saw in a shop window in Bond Street, threw away Pestle and  Hambey’s ugly pill-box, and drove off at once to Lady Clementina’s.
‘Well, _monsieur le mauvais sujet_,’ cried the old lady, as he entered  the room, ‘why haven’t you been to see me all this time?’    ‘My dear Lady Clem, I never have a moment to myself,’ said Lord Arthur,  smiling.
‘I suppose you mean that you go about all day long with Miss Sybil  Merton, buying _chiffons_ and talking nonsense?
I cannot understand why  people make such a fuss about being married.
In my day we never dreamed  of billing and cooing in public, or in private for that matter.’    ‘I assure you I have not seen Sybil for twenty-four hours, Lady Clem.
As  far as I can make out, she belongs entirely to her milliners.’    ‘Of course; that is the only reason you come to see an ugly old woman  like myself.
I wonder you men don’t take warning.
_On a fait des folies  pour moi_, and here I am, a poor rheumatic creature, with a false front  and a bad temper.
Why, if it were not for dear Lady Jansen, who sends me  all the worst French novels she can find, I don’t think I could get  through the day.
Doctors are no use at all, except to get fees out of  one.
They can’t even cure my heartburn.’    ‘I have brought you a cure for that, Lady Clem,’ said Lord Arthur  gravely.
‘It is a wonderful thing, invented by an American.’    ‘I don’t think I like American inventions, Arthur.
I am quite sure I  don’t.
I read some American novels lately, and they were quite  nonsensical.’    ‘Oh, but there is no nonsense at all about this, Lady Clem!  I assure you  it is a perfect cure.
You must promise to try it’; and Lord Arthur  brought the little box out of his pocket, and handed it to her.
‘Well, the box is charming, Arthur.
Is it really a present?
That is  very sweet of you.
And is this the wonderful medicine?
It looks like a  _bonbon_.
I’ll take it at once.’    ‘Good heavens!  Lady Clem,’ cried Lord Arthur, catching hold of her hand,  ‘you mustn’t do anything of the kind.
It is a homoeopathic medicine, and  if you take it without having heartburn, it might do you no end of harm.
Wait till you have an attack, and take it then.
You will be astonished  at the result.’    ‘I should like to take it now,’ said Lady Clementina, holding up to the  light the little transparent capsule, with its floating bubble of liquid  aconitine.
I am sure it is delicious.
The fact is that, though I hate  doctors, I love medicines.
However, I’ll keep it till my next attack.’    ‘And when will that be?’ asked Lord Arthur eagerly.
‘Will it be soon?’    ‘I hope not for a week.
I had a very bad time yesterday morning with it.
But one never knows.’    ‘You are sure to have one before the end of the month then, Lady Clem?’    ‘I am afraid so.
But how sympathetic you are to-day, Arthur!  Really,  Sybil has done you a great deal of good.
And now you must run away, for  I am dining with some very dull people, who won’t talk scandal, and I  know that if I don’t get my sleep now I shall never be able to keep awake  during dinner.
Good-bye, Arthur, give my love to Sybil, and thank you so  much for the American medicine.’    ‘You won’t forget to take it, Lady Clem, will you?’ said Lord Arthur,  rising from his seat.
‘Of course I won’t, you silly boy.
I think it is most kind of you to  think of me, and I shall write and tell you if I want any more.’    Lord Arthur left the house in high spirits, and with a feeling of immense  relief.
That night he had an interview with Sybil Merton.
He told her how he had  been suddenly placed in a position of terrible difficulty, from which  neither honour nor duty would allow him to recede.
He told her that the  marriage must be put off for the present, as until he had got rid of his  fearful entanglements, he was not a free man.
He implored her to trust  him, and not to have any doubts about the future.
Everything would come  right, but patience was necessary.
The scene took place in the conservatory of Mr. Merton’s house, in Park  Lane, where Lord Arthur had dined as usual.
Sybil had never seemed more  happy, and for a moment Lord Arthur had been tempted to play the coward’s  part, to write to Lady Clementina for the pill, and to let the marriage  go on as if there was no such person as Mr. Podgers in the world.
His  better nature, however, soon asserted itself, and even when Sybil flung  herself weeping into his arms, he did not falter.
The beauty that  stirred his senses had touched his conscience also.
He felt that to  wreck so fair a life for the sake of a few months’ pleasure would be a  wrong thing to do.
He stayed with Sybil till nearly midnight, comforting her and being  comforted in turn, and early the next morning he left for Venice, after  writing a manly, firm letter to Mr. Merton about the necessary  postponement of the marriage.
IN Venice he met his brother, Lord Surbiton, who happened to have come  over from Corfu in his yacht.
The two young men spent a delightful  fortnight together.
In the morning they rode on the Lido, or glided up  and down the green canals in their long black gondola; in the afternoon  they usually entertained visitors on the yacht; and in the evening they  dined at Florian’s, and smoked innumerable cigarettes on the Piazza.
Yet  somehow Lord Arthur was not happy.
Every day he studied the obituary  column in the _Times_, expecting to see a notice of Lady Clementina’s  death, but every day he was disappointed.
He began to be afraid that  some accident had happened to her, and often regretted that he had  prevented her taking the aconitine when she had been so anxious to try  its effect.
Sybil’s letters, too, though full of love, and trust, and  tenderness, were often very sad in their tone, and sometimes he used to  think that he was parted from her for ever.
After a fortnight Lord Surbiton got bored with Venice, and determined to  run down the coast to Ravenna, as he heard that there was some capital  cock-shooting in the Pinetum.
Lord Arthur at first refused absolutely to  come, but Surbiton, of whom he was extremely fond, finally persuaded him  that if he stayed at Danieli’s by himself he would be moped to death, and  on the morning of the 15th they started, with a strong nor’-east wind  blowing, and a rather choppy sea.
The sport was excellent, and the free,  open-air life brought the colour back to Lord Arthur’s cheek, but about  the 22nd he became anxious about Lady Clementina, and, in spite of  Surbiton’s remonstrances, came back to Venice by train.
As he stepped out of his gondola on to the hotel steps, the proprietor  came forward to meet him with a sheaf of telegrams.
Lord Arthur snatched  them out of his hand, and tore them open.
Everything had been  successful.
Lady Clementina had died quite suddenly on the night of the  17th!    His first thought was for Sybil, and he sent her off a telegram  announcing his immediate return to London.
He then ordered his valet to  pack his things for the night mail, sent his gondoliers about five times  their proper fare, and ran up to his sitting-room with a light step and a  buoyant heart.
There he found three letters waiting for him.
One was  from Sybil herself, full of sympathy and condolence.
The others were  from his mother, and from Lady Clementina’s solicitor.
It seemed that  the old lady had dined with the Duchess that very night, had delighted  every one by her wit and _esprit_, but had gone home somewhat early,  complaining of heartburn.
In the morning she was found dead in her bed,  having apparently suffered no pain.
Sir Mathew Reid had been sent for at  once, but, of course, there was nothing to be done, and she was to be  buried on the 22nd at Beauchamp Chalcote.
A few days before she died she  had made her will, and left Lord Arthur her little house in Curzon  Street, and all her furniture, personal effects, and pictures, with the  exception of her collection of miniatures, which was to go to her sister,  Lady Margaret Rufford, and her amethyst necklace, which Sybil Merton was  to have.
The property was not of much value; but Mr. Mansfield, the  solicitor, was extremely anxious for Lord Arthur to return at once, if  possible, as there were a great many bills to be paid, and Lady  Clementina had never kept any regular accounts.
Lord Arthur was very much touched by Lady Clementina’s kind remembrance  of him, and felt that Mr. Podgers had a great deal to answer for.
His  love of Sybil, however, dominated every other emotion, and the  consciousness that he had done his duty gave him peace and comfort.
When  he arrived at Charing Cross, he felt perfectly happy.
The Mertons received him very kindly.
Sybil made him promise that he  would never again allow anything to come between them, and the marriage  was fixed for the 7th June.
Life seemed to him once more bright and  beautiful, and all his old gladness came back to him again.
One day, however, as he was going over the house in Curzon Street, in  company with Lady Clementina’s solicitor and Sybil herself, burning  packages of faded letters, and turning out drawers of odd rubbish, the  young girl suddenly gave a little cry of delight.
‘What have you found, Sybil?’ said Lord Arthur, looking up from his work,  and smiling.
‘This lovely little silver _bonbonnière_, Arthur.
Isn’t it quaint and  Dutch?
Do give it to me!  I know amethysts won’t become me till I am  over eighty.’    It was the box that had held the aconitine.
Lord Arthur started, and a faint blush came into his cheek.
He had  almost entirely forgotten what he had done, and it seemed to him a  curious coincidence that Sybil, for whose sake he had gone through all  that terrible anxiety, should have been the first to remind him of it.
‘Of course you can have it, Sybil.
I gave it to poor Lady Clem myself.’    ‘Oh! thank you, Arthur; and may I have the _bonbon_ too?
I had no notion  that Lady Clementina liked sweets.
I thought she was far too  intellectual.’    Lord Arthur grew deadly pale, and a horrible idea crossed his mind.
‘_Bonbon_, Sybil?
What do you mean?’ he said in a slow, hoarse voice.
‘There is one in it, that is all.
It looks quite old and dusty, and I  have not the slightest intention of eating it.
What is the matter,  Arthur?
How white you look!’    Lord Arthur rushed across the room, and seized the box.
Inside it was  the amber-coloured capsule, with its poison-bubble.
Lady Clementina had  died a natural death after all!    The shock of the discovery was almost too much for him.
He flung the  capsule into the fire, and sank on the sofa with a cry of despair.
MR.
Merton was a good deal distressed at the second postponement of the  marriage, and Lady Julia, who had already ordered her dress for the  wedding, did all in her power to make Sybil break off the match.
Dearly,  however, as Sybil loved her mother, she had given her whole life into  Lord Arthur’s hands, and nothing that Lady Julia could say could make her  waver in her faith.
As for Lord Arthur himself, it took him days to get  over his terrible disappointment, and for a time his nerves were  completely unstrung.
His excellent common sense, however, soon asserted  itself, and his sound, practical mind did not leave him long in doubt  about what to do.
Poison having proved a complete failure, dynamite, or  some other form of explosive, was obviously the proper thing to try.
He accordingly looked again over the list of his friends and relatives,  and, after careful consideration, determined to blow up his uncle, the  Dean of Chichester.
The Dean, who was a man of great culture and  learning, was extremely fond of clocks, and had a wonderful collection of  timepieces, ranging from the fifteenth century to the present day, and it  seemed to Lord Arthur that this hobby of the good Dean’s offered him an  excellent opportunity for carrying out his scheme.
Where to procure an  explosive machine was, of course, quite another matter.
The London  Directory gave him no information on the point, and he felt that there  was very little use in going to Scotland Yard about it, as they never  seemed to know anything about the movements of the dynamite faction till  after an explosion had taken place, and not much even then.
Suddenly he thought of his friend Rouvaloff, a young Russian of very  revolutionary tendencies, whom he had met at Lady Windermere’s in the  winter.
Count Rouvaloff was supposed to be writing a life of Peter the  Great, and to have come over to England for the purpose of studying the  documents relating to that Tsar’s residence in this country as a ship  carpenter; but it was generally suspected that he was a Nihilist agent,  and there was no doubt that the Russian Embassy did not look with any  favour upon his presence in London.
Lord Arthur felt that he was just  the man for his purpose, and drove down one morning to his lodgings in  Bloomsbury, to ask his advice and assistance.
‘So you are taking up politics seriously?’ said Count Rouvaloff, when  Lord Arthur had told him the object of his mission; but Lord Arthur, who  hated swagger of any kind, felt bound to admit to him that he had not the  slightest interest in social questions, and simply wanted the explosive  machine for a purely family matter, in which no one was concerned but  himself.
Count Rouvaloff looked at him for some moments in amazement, and then  seeing that he was quite serious, wrote an address on a piece of paper,  initialled it, and handed it to him across the table.
‘Scotland Yard would give a good deal to know this address, my dear  fellow.’    ‘They shan’t have it,’ cried Lord Arthur, laughing; and after shaking the  young Russian warmly by the hand he ran downstairs, examined the paper,  and told the coachman to drive to Soho Square.
There he dismissed him, and strolled down Greek Street, till he came to a  place called Bayle’s Court.
He passed under the archway, and found  himself in a curious _cul-de-sac_, that was apparently occupied by a  French Laundry, as a perfect network of clothes-lines was stretched  across from house to house, and there was a flutter of white linen in the  morning air.
He walked right to the end, and knocked at a little green  house.
After some delay, during which every window in the court became a  blurred mass of peering faces, the door was opened by a rather  rough-looking foreigner, who asked him in very bad English what his  business was.
Lord Arthur handed him the paper Count Rouvaloff had given  him.
When the man saw it he bowed, and invited Lord Arthur into a very  shabby front parlour on the ground floor, and in a few moments Herr  Winckelkopf, as he was called in England, bustled into the room, with a  very wine-stained napkin round his neck, and a fork in his left hand.
‘Count Rouvaloff has given me an introduction to you,’ said Lord Arthur,  bowing, ‘and I am anxious to have a short interview with you on a matter  of business.
My name is Smith, Mr. Robert Smith, and I want you to  supply me with an explosive clock.’    ‘Charmed to meet you, Lord Arthur,’ said the genial little German,  laughing.
‘Don’t look so alarmed, it is my duty to know everybody, and I  remember seeing you one evening at Lady Windermere’s.
I hope her  ladyship is quite well.
Do you mind sitting with me while I finish my  breakfast?
There is an excellent _pâté_, and my friends are kind enough  to say that my Rhine wine is better than any they get at the German  Embassy,’ and before Lord Arthur had got over his surprise at being  recognised, he found himself seated in the back-room, sipping the most  delicious Marcobrünner out of a pale yellow hock-glass marked with the  Imperial monogram, and chatting in the friendliest manner possible to the  famous conspirator.
‘Explosive clocks,’ said Herr Winckelkopf, ‘are not very good things for  foreign exportation, as, even if they succeed in passing the Custom  House, the train service is so irregular, that they usually go off before  they have reached their proper destination.
If, however, you want one  for home use, I can supply you with an excellent article, and guarantee  that you will he satisfied with the result.
May I ask for whom it is  intended?
If it is for the police, or for any one connected with  Scotland Yard, I am afraid I cannot do anything for you.
The English  detectives are really our best friends, and I have always found that by  relying on their stupidity, we can do exactly what we like.
I could not  spare one of them.’    ‘I assure you,’ said Lord Arthur, ‘that it has nothing to do with the  police at all.
In fact, the clock is intended for the Dean of  Chichester.’    ‘Dear me!  I had no idea that you felt so strongly about religion, Lord  Arthur.
Few young men do nowadays.’    ‘I am afraid you overrate me, Herr Winckelkopf,’ said Lord Arthur,  blushing.
‘The fact is, I really know nothing about theology.’    ‘It is a purely private matter then?’    ‘Purely private.’    Herr Winckelkopf shrugged his shoulders, and left the room, returning in  a few minutes with a round cake of dynamite about the size of a penny,  and a pretty little French clock, surmounted by an ormolu figure of  Liberty trampling on the hydra of Despotism.
Lord Arthur’s face brightened up when he saw it.
‘That is just what I  want,’ he cried, ‘and now tell me how it goes off.’    ‘Ah! there is my secret,’ answered Herr Winckelkopf, contemplating his  invention with a justifiable look of pride; ‘let me know when you wish it  to explode, and I will set the machine to the moment.’    ‘Well, to-day is Tuesday, and if you could send it off at once—’    ‘That is impossible; I have a great deal of important work on hand for  some friends of mine in Moscow.
Still, I might send it off to-morrow.’    ‘Oh, it will be quite time enough!’ said Lord Arthur politely, ‘if it is  delivered to-morrow night or Thursday morning.
For the moment of the  explosion, say Friday at noon exactly.
The Dean is always at home at  that hour.’    ‘Friday, at noon,’ repeated Herr Winckelkopf, and he made a note to that  effect in a large ledger that was lying on a bureau near the fireplace.
‘And now,’ said Lord Arthur, rising from his seat, ‘pray let me know how  much I am in your debt.’    ‘It is such a small matter, Lord Arthur, that I do not care to make any  charge.
The dynamite comes to seven and sixpence, the clock will be  three pounds ten, and the carriage about five shillings.
I am only too  pleased to oblige any friend of Count Rouvaloff’s.’    ‘But your trouble, Herr Winckelkopf?’    ‘Oh, that is nothing!  It is a pleasure to me.
I do not work for money;  I live entirely for my art.’    Lord Arthur laid down £4, 2s.
6d.
on the table, thanked the little German  for his kindness, and, having succeeded in declining an invitation to  meet some Anarchists at a meat-tea on the following Saturday, left the  house and went off to the Park.
For the next two days he was in a state of the greatest excitement, and  on Friday at twelve o’clock he drove down to the Buckingham to wait for  news.
All the afternoon the stolid hall-porter kept posting up telegrams  from various parts of the country giving the results of horse-races, the  verdicts in divorce suits, the state of the weather, and the like, while  the tape ticked out wearisome details about an all-night sitting in the  House of Commons, and a small panic on the Stock Exchange.
At four  o’clock the evening papers came in, and Lord Arthur disappeared into the  library with the _Pall Mall_, the _St. James’s_, the _Globe_, and the  _Echo_, to the immense indignation of Colonel Goodchild, who wanted to  read the reports of a speech he had delivered that morning at the Mansion  House, on the subject of South African Missions, and the advisability of  having black Bishops in every province, and for some reason or other had  a strong prejudice against the _Evening News_.
None of the papers,  however, contained even the slightest allusion to Chichester, and Lord  Arthur felt that the attempt must have failed.
It was a terrible blow to  him, and for a time he was quite unnerved.
Herr Winckelkopf, whom he  went to see the next day was full of elaborate apologies, and offered to  supply him with another clock free of charge, or with a case of  nitro-glycerine bombs at cost price.
But he had lost all faith in  explosives, and Herr Winckelkopf himself acknowledged that everything is  so adulterated nowadays, that even dynamite can hardly be got in a pure  condition.
The little German, however, while admitting that something  must have gone wrong with the machinery, was not without hope that the  clock might still go off, and instanced the case of a barometer that he  had once sent to the military Governor at Odessa, which, though timed to  explode in ten days, had not done so for something like three months.
It  was quite true that when it did go off, it merely succeeded in blowing a  housemaid to atoms, the Governor having gone out of town six weeks  before, but at least it showed that dynamite, as a destructive force,  was, when under the control of machinery, a powerful, though a somewhat  unpunctual agent.
Lord Arthur was a little consoled by this reflection,  but even here he was destined to disappointment, for two days afterwards,  as he was going upstairs, the Duchess called him into her boudoir, and  showed him a letter she had just received from the Deanery.
‘Jane writes charming letters,’ said the Duchess; ‘you must really read  her last.
It is quite as good as the novels Mudie sends us.’    Lord Arthur seized the letter from her hand.
It ran as follows:—                                                      THE DEANERY, CHICHESTER,                                                               27_th_ _May_.
My Dearest Aunt,        Thank you so much for the flannel for the Dorcas Society, and also      for the gingham.
I quite agree with you that it is nonsense their      wanting to wear pretty things, but everybody is so Radical and      irreligious nowadays, that it is difficult to make them see that they      should not try and dress like the upper classes.
I am sure I don’t      know what we are coming to.
As papa has often said in his sermons,      we live in an age of unbelief.
We have had great fun over a clock that an unknown admirer sent papa      last Thursday.
It arrived in a wooden box from London, carriage      paid, and papa feels it must have been sent by some one who had read      his remarkable sermon, ‘Is Licence Liberty?’ for on the top of the      clock was a figure of a woman, with what papa said was the cap of      Liberty on her head.
I didn’t think it very becoming myself, but      papa said it was historical, so I suppose it is all right.
Parker      unpacked it, and papa put it on the mantelpiece in the library, and      we were all sitting there on Friday morning, when just as the clock      struck twelve, we heard a whirring noise, a little puff of smoke came      from the pedestal of the figure, and the goddess of Liberty fell off,      and broke her nose on the fender!  Maria was quite alarmed, but it      looked so ridiculous, that James and I went off into fits of      laughter, and even papa was amused.
When we examined it, we found it      was a sort of alarum clock, and that, if you set it to a particular      hour, and put some gunpowder and a cap under a little hammer, it went      off whenever you wanted.
Papa said it must not remain in the      library, as it made a noise, so Reggie carried it away to the      schoolroom, and does nothing but have small explosions all day long.
Do you think Arthur would like one for a wedding present?
I suppose      they are quite fashionable in London.
Papa says they should do a      great deal of good, as they show that Liberty can’t last, but must      fall down.
Papa says Liberty was invented at the time of the French      Revolution.
How awful it seems!        I have now to go to the Dorcas, where I will read them your most      instructive letter.
How true, dear aunt, your idea is, that in their      rank of life they should wear what is unbecoming.
I must say it is      absurd, their anxiety about dress, when there are so many more      important things in this world, and in the next.
I am so glad your      flowered poplin turned out so well, and that your lace was not torn.
I am wearing my yellow satin, that you so kindly gave me, at the      Bishop’s on Wednesday, and think it will look all right.
Would you      have bows or not?
Jennings says that every one wears bows now, and      that the underskirt should be frilled.
Reggie has just had another      explosion, and papa has ordered the clock to be sent to the stables.
I don’t think papa likes it so much as he did at first, though he is      very flattered at being sent such a pretty and ingenious toy.
It      shows that people read his sermons, and profit by them.
Papa sends his love, in which James, and Reggie, and Maria all unite,      and, hoping that Uncle Cecil’s gout is better, believe me, dear aunt,      ever your affectionate niece,                                                                   JANE PERCY.
_PS._—Do tell me about the bows.
Jennings insists they are the      fashion.
Lord Arthur looked so serious and unhappy over the letter, that the  Duchess went into fits of laughter.
‘My dear Arthur,’ she cried, ‘I shall never show you a young lady’s  letter again!  But what shall I say about the clock?
I think it is a  capital invention, and I should like to have one myself.’    ‘I don’t think much of them,’ said Lord Arthur, with a sad smile, and,  after kissing his mother, he left the room.
When he got upstairs, he flung himself on a sofa, and his eyes filled  with tears.
He had done his best to commit this murder, but on both  occasions he had failed, and through no fault of his own.
He had tried  to do his duty, but it seemed as if Destiny herself had turned traitor.
He was oppressed with the sense of the barrenness of good intentions, of  the futility of trying to be fine.
Perhaps, it would be better to break  off the marriage altogether.
Sybil would suffer, it is true, but  suffering could not really mar a nature so noble as hers.
As for  himself, what did it matter?
There is always some war in which a man can  die, some cause to which a man can give his life, and as life had no  pleasure for him, so death had no terror.
Let Destiny work out his doom.
He would not stir to help her.
At half-past seven he dressed, and went down to the club.
Surbiton was  there with a party of young men, and he was obliged to dine with them.
Their trivial conversation and idle jests did not interest him, and as  soon as coffee was brought he left them, inventing some engagement in  order to get away.
As he was going out of the club, the hall-porter  handed him a letter.
It was from Herr Winckelkopf, asking him to call  down the next evening, and look at an explosive umbrella, that went off  as soon as it was opened.
It was the very latest invention, and had just  arrived from Geneva.
He tore the letter up into fragments.
He had made  up his mind not to try any more experiments.
Then he wandered down to  the Thames Embankment, and sat for hours by the river.
The moon peered  through a mane of tawny clouds, as if it were a lion’s eye, and  innumerable stars spangled the hollow vault, like gold dust powdered on a  purple dome.
Now and then a barge swung out into the turbid stream, and  floated away with the tide, and the railway signals changed from green to  scarlet as the trains ran shrieking across the bridge.
After some time,  twelve o’clock boomed from the tall tower at Westminster, and at each  stroke of the sonorous bell the night seemed to tremble.
Then the  railway lights went out, one solitary lamp left gleaming like a large  ruby on a giant mast, and the roar of the city became fainter.
At two o’clock he got up, and strolled towards Blackfriars.
How unreal  everything looked!  How like a strange dream!  The houses on the other  side of the river seemed built out of darkness.
One would have said that  silver and shadow had fashioned the world anew.
The huge dome of St.  Paul’s loomed like a bubble through the dusky air.
As he approached Cleopatra’s Needle he saw a man leaning over the  parapet, and as he came nearer the man looked up, the gas-light falling  full upon his face.
It was Mr. Podgers, the cheiromantist!  No one could mistake the fat,  flabby face, the gold-rimmed spectacles, the sickly feeble smile, the  sensual mouth.
Lord Arthur stopped.
A brilliant idea flashed across him, and he stole  softly up behind.
In a moment he had seized Mr. Podgers by the legs, and  flung him into the Thames.
There was a coarse oath, a heavy splash, and  all was still.
Lord Arthur looked anxiously over, but could see nothing  of the cheiromantist but a tall hat, pirouetting in an eddy of moonlit  water.
After a time it also sank, and no trace of Mr. Podgers was  visible.
Once he thought that he caught sight of the bulky misshapen  figure striking out for the staircase by the bridge, and a horrible  feeling of failure came over him, but it turned out to be merely a  reflection, and when the moon shone out from behind a cloud it passed  away.
At last he seemed to have realised the decree of destiny.
He  heaved a deep sigh of relief, and Sybil’s name came to his lips.
‘Have you dropped anything, sir?’ said a voice behind him suddenly.
He turned round, and saw a policeman with a bull’s-eye lantern.
‘Nothing of importance, sergeant,’ he answered, smiling, and hailing a  passing hansom, he jumped in, and told the man to drive to Belgrave  Square.
For the next few days he alternated between hope and fear.
There were  moments when he almost expected Mr. Podgers to walk into the room, and  yet at other times he felt that Fate could not be so unjust to him.
Twice he went to the cheiromantist’s address in West Moon Street, but he  could not bring himself to ring the bell.
He longed for certainty, and  was afraid of it.
Finally it came.
He was sitting in the smoking-room of the club having  tea, and listening rather wearily to Surbiton’s account of the last comic  song at the Gaiety, when the waiter came in with the evening papers.
He  took up the _St. James’s_, and was listlessly turning over its pages,  when this strange heading caught his eye:                             SUICIDE OF A CHEIROMANTIST.
He turned pale with excitement, and began to read.
The paragraph ran as  follows:        Yesterday morning, at seven o’clock, the body of Mr. Septimus R.
Podgers, the eminent cheiromantist, was washed on shore at Greenwich,      just in front of the Ship Hotel.
The unfortunate gentleman had been      missing for some days, and considerable anxiety for his safety had      been felt in cheiromantic circles.
It is supposed that he committed      suicide under the influence of a temporary mental derangement, caused      by overwork, and a verdict to that effect was returned this afternoon      by the coroner’s jury.
Mr. Podgers had just completed an elaborate      treatise on the subject of the Human Hand, that will shortly be      published, when it will no doubt attract much attention.
The      deceased was sixty-five years of age, and does not seem to have left      any relations.
Lord Arthur rushed out of the club with the paper still in his hand, to  the immense amazement of the hall-porter, who tried in vain to stop him,  and drove at once to Park Lane.
Sybil saw him from the window, and  something told her that he was the bearer of good news.
She ran down to  meet him, and, when she saw his face, she knew that all was well.
‘My dear Sybil,’ cried Lord Arthur, ‘let us be married to-morrow!’    ‘You foolish boy!  Why, the cake is not even ordered!’ said Sybil,  laughing through her tears.
WHEN the wedding took place, some three weeks later, St. Peter’s was  crowded with a perfect mob of smart people.
The service was read in the  most impressive manner by the Dean of Chichester, and everybody agreed  that they had never seen a handsomer couple than the bride and  bridegroom.
They were more than handsome, however—they were happy.
Never for a single moment did Lord Arthur regret all that he had suffered  for Sybil’s sake, while she, on her side, gave him the best things a  woman can give to any man—worship, tenderness, and love.
For them  romance was not killed by reality.
They always felt young.
Some years afterwards, when two beautiful children had been born to them,  Lady Windermere came down on a visit to Alton Priory, a lovely old place,  that had been the Duke’s wedding present to his son; and one afternoon as  she was sitting with Lady Arthur under a lime-tree in the garden,  watching the little boy and girl as they played up and down the  rose-walk, like fitful sunbeams, she suddenly took her hostess’s hand in  hers, and said, ‘Are you happy, Sybil?’    ‘Dear Lady Windermere, of course I am happy.
Aren’t you?’    ‘I have no time to be happy, Sybil.
I always like the last person who is  introduced to me; but, as a rule, as soon as I know people I get tired of  them.’    ‘Don’t your lions satisfy you, Lady Windermere?’    ‘Oh dear, no! lions are only good for one season.
As soon as their manes  are cut, they are the dullest creatures going.
Besides, they behave very  badly, if you are really nice to them.
Do you remember that horrid Mr.  Podgers?
He was a dreadful impostor.
Of course, I didn’t mind that at  all, and even when he wanted to borrow money I forgave him, but I could  not stand his making love to me.
He has really made me hate cheiromancy.
I go in for telepathy now.
It is much more amusing.’    ‘You mustn’t say anything against cheiromancy here, Lady Windermere; it  is the only subject that Arthur does not like people to chaff about.
I  assure you he is quite serious over it.’    ‘You don’t mean to say that he believes in it, Sybil?’    ‘Ask him, Lady Windermere, here he is’; and Lord Arthur came up the  garden with a large bunch of yellow roses in his hand, and his two  children dancing round him.
‘Lord Arthur?’    ‘Yes, Lady Windermere.’    ‘You don’t mean to say that you believe in cheiromancy?’    ‘Of course I do,’ said the young man, smiling.
‘But why?’    ‘Because I owe to it all the happiness of my life,’ he murmured, throwing  himself into a wicker chair.
‘My dear Lord Arthur, what do you owe to it?’    ‘Sybil,’ he answered, handing his wife the roses, and looking into her  violet eyes.
‘What nonsense!’ cried Lady Windermere.
‘I never heard such nonsense in  all my life.’          THE CANTERVILLE GHOST  A HYLO-IDEALISTIC ROMANCE            WHEN Mr. Hiram B.
Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase,  every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no  doubt at all that the place was haunted.
Indeed, Lord Canterville  himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his  duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.
‘We have not cared to live in the place ourselves,’ said Lord  Canterville, ‘since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was  frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two  skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for  dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been  seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of  the parish, the Rev.
Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King’s College,  Cambridge.
After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none of our  younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often got very  little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises that came  from the corridor and the library.’    ‘My Lord,’ answered the Minister, ‘I will take the furniture and the  ghost at a valuation.
I come from a modern country, where we have  everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows  painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actresses and  prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in  Europe, we’d have it at home in a very short time in one of our public  museums, or on the road as a show.’    ‘I fear that the ghost exists,’ said Lord Canterville, smiling, ‘though  it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios.
It  has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always  makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family.’    ‘Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville.
But  there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature  are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy.’    ‘You are certainly very natural in America,’ answered Lord Canterville,  who did not quite understand Mr. Otis’s last observation, ‘and if you  don’t mind a ghost in the house, it is all right.
Only you must remember  I warned you.’    A few weeks after this, the purchase was completed, and at the close of  the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.
Mrs.
Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R.
Tappan, of West 53rd Street, had been  a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,  with fine eyes, and a superb profile.
Many American ladies on leaving  their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the  impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs.
Otis had  never fallen into this error.
She had a magnificent constitution, and a  really wonderful amount of animal spirits.
Indeed, in many respects, she  was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we have  really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of course,  language.
Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents in a  moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a fair-haired,  rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself for American  diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for three  successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an excellent  dancer.
Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.
Otherwise  he was extremely sensible.
Miss Virginia E.
Otis was a little girl of  fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom in her large  blue eyes.
She was a wonderful amazon, and had once raced old Lord  Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length and a half,  just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of the young  Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was sent back to  Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.
After  Virginia came the twins, who were usually called ‘The Stars and Stripes,’  as they were always getting swished.
They were delightful boys, and with  the exception of the worthy Minister the only true republicans of the  family.
As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway  station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and they  started on their drive in high spirits.
It was a lovely July evening,  and the air was delicate with the scent of the pine-woods.
Now and then  they heard a wood pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or saw, deep  in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.
Little  squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by, and the  rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy knolls,  with their white tails in the air.
As they entered the avenue of  Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with clouds,  a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great flight of  rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they reached the  house, some big drops of rain had fallen.
Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed in  black silk, with a white cap and apron.
This was Mrs.
Umney, the  housekeeper, whom Mrs.
Otis, at Lady Canterville’s earnest request, had  consented to keep on in her former position.
She made them each a low  curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner, ‘I  bid you welcome to Canterville Chase.’  Following her, they passed  through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled  in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained-glass window.
Here  they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps, they  sat down and began to look round, while Mrs.
Umney waited on them.
Suddenly Mrs.
Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by  the fireplace and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said to  Mrs.
Umney, ‘I am afraid something has been spilt there.’    ‘Yes, madam,’ replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, ‘blood has been  spilt on that spot.’    ‘How horrid,’ cried Mrs.
Otis; ‘I don’t at all care for blood-stains in a  sitting-room.
It must be removed at once.’    The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice, ‘It  is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on that  very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.
Sir  Simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very  mysterious circumstances.
His body has never been discovered, but his  guilty spirit still haunts the Chase.
The blood-stain has been much  admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed.’    ‘That is all nonsense,’ cried Washington Otis; ‘Pinkerton’s Champion  Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no time,’ and  before the terrified housekeeper could interfere he had fallen upon his  knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what  looked like a black cosmetic.
In a few moments no trace of the  blood-stain could be seen.
‘I knew Pinkerton would do it,’ he exclaimed triumphantly, as he looked  round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these words than  a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a fearful peal of  thunder made them all start to their feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainted.
‘What a monstrous climate!’ said the American Minister calmly, as he lit  a long cheroot.
‘I guess the old country is so overpopulated that they  have not enough decent weather for everybody.
I have always been of  opinion that emigration is the only thing for England.’    ‘My dear Hiram,’ cried Mrs.
Otis, ‘what can we do with a woman who  faints?’    ‘Charge it to her like breakages,’ answered the Minister; ‘she won’t  faint after that’; and in a few moments Mrs.
Umney certainly came to.
There was no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she  sternly warned Mr. Otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.
‘I have seen things with my own eyes, sir,’ she said, ‘that would make  any Christian’s hair stand on end, and many and many a night I have not  closed my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here.’  Mr.  Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they were  not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of Providence on  her new master and mistress, and making arrangements for an increase of  salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.
THE storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note  occurred.
The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,  they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor.
‘I don’t  think it can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent,’ said Washington,  ‘for I have tried it with everything.
It must be the ghost.’  He  accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, but the second morning it  appeared again.
The third morning also it was there, though the library  had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis himself, and the key carried  upstairs.
The whole family were now quite interested; Mr. Otis began to  suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his denial of the existence of  ghosts, Mrs.
Otis expressed her intention of joining the Psychical  Society, and Washington prepared a long letter to Messrs.
Myers and  Podmore on the subject of the Permanence of Sanguineous Stains when  connected with Crime.
That night all doubts about the objective  existence of phantasmata were removed for ever.
The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the  whole family went out for a drive.
They did not return home till nine  o’clock, when they had a light supper.
The conversation in no way turned  upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of receptive  expectation which so often precede the presentation of psychical  phenomena.
The subjects discussed, as I have since learned from Mr.  Otis, were merely such as form the ordinary conversation of cultured  Americans of the better class, such as the immense superiority of Miss  Fanny Davenport over Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the difficulty of  obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in the best  English houses; the importance of Boston in the development of the  world-soul; the advantages of the baggage check system in railway  travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as compared to the  London drawl.
No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was  Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way.
At eleven o’clock the  family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out.
Some time  after, Mr. Otis was awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside  his room.
It sounded like the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming  nearer every moment.
He got up at once, struck a match, and looked at  the time.
It was exactly one o’clock.
He was quite calm, and felt his  pulse, which was not at all feverish.
The strange noise still continued,  and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps.
He put on his  slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, and opened  the door.
Right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man  of terrible aspect.
His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair  fell over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which were of  antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung  heavy manacles and rusty gyves.
‘My dear sir,’ said Mr. Otis, ‘I really must insist on your oiling those  chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the  Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator.
It is said to be completely efficacious  upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect  on the wrapper from some of our most eminent native divines.
I shall  leave it here for you by the bedroom candles, and will be happy to supply  you with more should you require it.’  With these words the United States  Minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and, closing his door,  retired to rest.
For a moment the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural  indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor,  he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a ghastly  green light.
Just, however, as he reached the top of the great oak  staircase, a door was flung open, two little white-robed figures  appeared, and a large pillow whizzed past his head!  There was evidently  no time to be lost, so, hastily adopting the Fourth Dimension of Space as  a means of escape, he vanished through the wainscoting, and the house  became quite quiet.
On reaching a small secret chamber in the left wing, he leaned up against  a moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realise his  position.
Never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three  hundred years, had he been so grossly insulted.
He thought of the  Dowager Duchess, whom he had frightened into a fit as she stood before  the glass in her lace and diamonds; of the four housemaids, who had gone  off into hysterics when he merely grinned at them through the curtains of  one of the spare bedrooms; of the rector of the parish, whose candle he  had blown out as he was coming late one night from the library, and who  had been under the care of Sir William Gull ever since, a perfect martyr  to nervous disorders; and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who, having  wakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an arm-chair  by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed for six weeks  with an attack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become  reconciled to the Church, and broken off her connection with that  notorious sceptic Monsieur de Voltaire.
He remembered the terrible night  when the wicked Lord Canterville was found choking in his dressing-room,  with the knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and confessed, just  before he died, that he had cheated Charles James Fox out of £50,000 at  Crockford’s by means of that very card, and swore that the ghost had made  him swallow it.
All his great achievements came back to him again, from  the butler who had shot himself in the pantry because he had seen a green  hand tapping at the window pane, to the beautiful Lady Stutfield, who was  always obliged to wear a black velvet band round her throat to hide the  mark of five fingers burnt upon her white skin, and who drowned herself  at last in the carp-pond at the end of the King’s Walk.
With the  enthusiastic egotism of the true artist he went over his most celebrated  performances, and smiled bitterly to himself as he recalled to mind his  last appearance as ‘Red Ruben, or the Strangled Babe,’ his _début_ as  ‘Gaunt Gibeon, the Blood-sucker of Bexley Moor,’ and the _furore_ he had  excited one lovely June evening by merely playing ninepins with his own  bones upon the lawn-tennis ground.
And after all this, some wretched  modern Americans were to come and offer him the Rising Sun Lubricator,  and throw pillows at his head!  It was quite unbearable.
Besides, no  ghosts in history had ever been treated in this manner.
Accordingly, he  determined to have vengeance, and remained till daylight in an attitude  of deep thought.
THE next morning when the Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed  the ghost at some length.
The United States Minister was naturally a  little annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted.
‘I have  no wish,’ he said, ‘to do the ghost any personal injury, and I must say  that, considering the length of time he has been in the house, I don’t  think it is at all polite to throw pillows at him’—a very just remark, at  which, I am sorry to say, the twins burst into shouts of laughter.
‘Upon  the other hand,’ he continued, ‘if he really declines to use the Rising  Sun Lubricator, we shall have to take his chains from him.
It would be  quite impossible to sleep, with such a noise going on outside the  bedrooms.’    For the rest of the week, however, they were undisturbed, the only thing  that excited any attention being the continual renewal of the blood-stain  on the library floor.
This certainly was very strange, as the door was  always locked at night by Mr. Otis, and the windows kept closely barred.
The chameleon-like colour, also, of the stain excited a good deal of  comment.
Some mornings it was a dull (almost Indian) red, then it would  be vermilion, then a rich purple, and once when they came down for family  prayers, according to the simple rites of the Free American Reformed  Episcopalian Church, they found it a bright emerald-green.
These  kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused the party very much, and bets on  the subject were freely made every evening.
The only person who did not  enter into the joke was little Virginia, who, for some unexplained  reason, was always a good deal distressed at the sight of the  blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was emerald-green.
The second appearance of the ghost was on Sunday night.
Shortly after  they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in the  hall.
Rushing downstairs, they found that a large suit of old armour had  become detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone floor, while,  seated in a high-backed chair, was the Canterville ghost, rubbing his  knees with an expression of acute agony on his face.
The twins, having  brought their pea-shooters with them, at once discharged two pellets on  him, with that accuracy of aim which can only be attained by long and  careful practice on a writing-master, while the United States Minister  covered him with his revolver, and called upon him, in accordance with  Californian etiquette, to hold up his hands!  The ghost started up with a  wild shriek of rage, and swept through them like a mist, extinguishing  Washington Otis’s candle as he passed, and so leaving them all in total  darkness.
On reaching the top of the staircase he recovered himself, and  determined to give his celebrated peal of demoniac laughter.
This he had  on more than one occasion found extremely useful.
It was said to have  turned Lord Raker’s wig grey in a single night, and had certainly made  three of Lady Canterville’s French governesses give warning before their  month was up.
He accordingly laughed his most horrible laugh, till the  old vaulted roof rang and rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo  died away when a door opened, and Mrs.
Otis came out in a light blue  dressing-gown.
‘I am afraid you are far from well,’ she said, ‘and have  brought you a bottle of Dr. Dobell’s tincture.
If it is indigestion, you  will find it a most excellent remedy.’  The ghost glared at her in fury,  and began at once to make preparations for turning himself into a large  black dog, an accomplishment for which he was justly renowned, and to  which the family doctor always attributed the permanent idiocy of Lord  Canterville’s uncle, the Hon.
Thomas Horton.
The sound of approaching  footsteps, however, made him hesitate in his fell purpose, so he  contented himself with becoming faintly phosphorescent, and vanished with  a deep churchyard groan, just as the twins had come up to him.
On reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to the  most violent agitation.
The vulgarity of the twins, and the gross  materialism of Mrs.
Otis, were naturally extremely annoying, but what  really distressed him most was, that he had been unable to wear the suit  of mail.
He had hoped that even modern Americans would be thrilled by  the sight of a Spectre In Armour, if for no more sensible reason, at  least out of respect for their national poet Longfellow, over whose  graceful and attractive poetry he himself had whiled away many a weary  hour when the Cantervilles were up in town.
Besides, it was his own  suit.
He had worn it with great success at the Kenilworth tournament,  and had been highly complimented on it by no less a person than the  Virgin Queen herself.
Yet when he had put it on, he had been completely  overpowered by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque, and  had fallen heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees  severely, and bruising the knuckles of his right hand.
For some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardly stirred out of  his room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper repair.
However, by taking great care of himself, he recovered, and resolved to  make a third attempt to frighten the United States Minister and his  family.
He selected Friday, the 17th of August, for his appearance, and  spent most of that day in looking over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding  in favour of a large slouched hat with a red feather, a winding-sheet  frilled at the wrists and neck, and a rusty dagger.
Towards evening a  violent storm of rain came on, and the wind was so high that all the  windows and doors in the old house shook and rattled.
In fact, it was  just such weather as he loved.
His plan of action was this.
He was to  make his way quietly to Washington Otis’s room, gibber at him from the  foot of the bed, and stab himself three times in the throat to the sound  of slow music.
He bore Washington a special grudge, being quite aware  that it was he who was in the habit of removing the famous Canterville  blood-stain, by means of Pinkerton’s Paragon Detergent.
Having reduced  the reckless and foolhardy youth to a condition of abject terror, he was  then to proceed to the room occupied by the United States Minister and  his wife, and there to place a clammy hand on Mrs.
Otis’s forehead, while  he hissed into her trembling husband’s ear the awful secrets of the  charnel-house.
With regard to little Virginia, he had not quite made up  his mind.
She had never insulted him in any way, and was pretty and  gentle.
A few hollow groans from the wardrobe, he thought, would be more  than sufficient, or, if that failed to wake her, he might grabble at the  counterpane with palsy-twitching fingers.
As for the twins, he was quite  determined to teach them a lesson.
The first thing to be done was, of  course, to sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling sensation  of nightmare.
Then, as their beds were quite close to each other, to  stand between them in the form of a green, icy-cold corpse, till they  became paralysed with fear, and finally, to throw off the winding-sheet,  and crawl round the room, with white bleached bones and one rolling  eye-ball, in the character of ‘Dumb Daniel, or the Suicide’s Skeleton,’ a  _rôle_ in which he had on more than one occasion produced a great effect,  and which he considered quite equal to his famous part of ‘Martin the  Maniac, or the Masked Mystery.’    At half-past ten he heard the family going to bed.
For some time he was  disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, who, with the  light-hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing themselves  before they retired to rest, but at a quarter past eleven all was still,  and, as midnight sounded, he sallied forth.
The owl beat against the  window panes, the raven croaked from the old yew-tree, and the wind  wandered moaning round the house like a lost soul; but the Otis family  slept unconscious of their doom, and high above the rain and storm he  could hear the steady snoring of the Minister for the United States.
He  stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil smile on his  cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the moon hid her face in a cloud as he stole  past the great oriel window, where his own arms and those of his murdered  wife were blazoned in azure and gold.
On and on he glided, like an evil  shadow, the very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed.
Once he  thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only the baying  of a dog from the Red Farm, and he went on, muttering strange  sixteenth-century curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty dagger  in the midnight air.
Finally he reached the corner of the passage that  led to luckless Washington’s room.
For a moment he paused there, the  wind blowing his long grey locks about his head, and twisting into  grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless horror of the dead man’s  shroud.
Then the clock struck the quarter, and he felt the time was  come.
He chuckled to himself, and turned the corner; but no sooner had  he done so, than, with a piteous wail of terror, he fell back, and hid  his blanched face in his long, bony hands.
Right in front of him was  standing a horrible spectre, motionless as a carven image, and monstrous  as a madman’s dream!  Its head was bald and burnished; its face round,  and fat, and white; and hideous laughter seemed to have writhed its  features into an eternal grin.
From the eyes streamed rays of scarlet  light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a hideous garment, like to  his own, swathed with its silent snows the Titan form.
On its breast was  a placard with strange writing in antique characters, some scroll of  shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful calendar of crime,  and, with its right hand, it bore aloft a falchion of gleaming steel.
Never having seen a ghost before, he naturally was terribly frightened,  and, after a second hasty glance at the awful phantom, he fled back to  his room, tripping up in his long winding-sheet as he sped down the  corridor, and finally dropping the rusty dagger into the Minister’s  jack-boots, where it was found in the morning by the butler.
Once in the  privacy of his own apartment, he flung himself down on a small  pallet-bed, and hid his face under the clothes.
After a time, however,  the brave old Canterville spirit asserted itself, and he determined to go  and speak to the other ghost as soon as it was daylight.
Accordingly,  just as the dawn was touching the hills with silver, he returned towards  the spot where he had first laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling  that, after all, two ghosts were better than one, and that, by the aid of  his new friend, he might safely grapple with the twins.
On reaching the  spot, however, a terrible sight met his gaze.
Something had evidently  happened to the spectre, for the light had entirely faded from its hollow  eyes, the gleaming falchion had fallen from its hand, and it was leaning  up against the wall in a strained and uncomfortable attitude.
He rushed  forward and seized it in his arms, when, to his horror, the head slipped  off and rolled on the floor, the body assumed a recumbent posture, and he  found himself clasping a white dimity bed-curtain, with a sweeping-brush,  a kitchen cleaver, and a hollow turnip lying at his feet!  Unable to  understand this curious transformation, he clutched the placard with  feverish haste, and there, in the grey morning light, he read these  fearful words:—                                    YE OLDE GHOSTE                          Ye Onlie True and Originale Spook.
Beware of Ye Imitationes.
All others are Counterfeite.
The whole thing flashed across him.
He had been tricked, foiled, and  outwitted!  The old Canterville look came into his eyes; he ground his  toothless gums together; and, raising his withered hands high above his  head, swore, according to the picturesque phraseology of the antique  school, that when Chanticleer had sounded twice his merry horn, deeds of  blood would be wrought, and Murder walk abroad with silent feet.
Hardly had he finished this awful oath when, from the red-tiled roof of a  distant homestead, a cock crew.
He laughed a long, low, bitter laugh,  and waited.
Hour after hour he waited, but the cock, for some strange  reason, did not crow again.
Finally, at half-past seven, the arrival of  the housemaids made him give up his fearful vigil, and he stalked back to  his room, thinking of his vain hope and baffled purpose.
There he  consulted several books of ancient chivalry, of which he was exceedingly  fond, and found that, on every occasion on which his oath had been used,  Chanticleer had always crowed a second time.
‘Perdition seize the  naughty fowl,’ he muttered, ‘I have seen the day when, with my stout  spear, I would have run him through the gorge, and made him crow for me  an ’twere in death!’  He then retired to a comfortable lead coffin, and  stayed there till evening.
THE next day the ghost was very weak and tired.
The terrible excitement  of the last four weeks was beginning to have its effect.
His nerves were  completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise.
For five  days he kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point  of the blood-stain on the library floor.
If the Otis family did not want  it, they clearly did not deserve it.
They were evidently people on a  low, material plane of existence, and quite incapable of appreciating the  symbolic value of sensuous phenomena.
The question of phantasmic  apparitions, and the development of astral bodies, was of course quite a  different matter, and really not under his control.
It was his solemn  duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to gibber from the large  oriel window on the first and third Wednesday in every month, and he did  not see how he could honourably escape from his obligations.
It is quite  true that his life had been very evil, but, upon the other hand, he was  most conscientious in all things connected with the supernatural.
For  the next three Saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as usual  between midnight and three o’clock, taking every possible precaution  against being either heard or seen.
He removed his boots, trod as  lightly as possible on the old worm-eaten boards, wore a large black  velvet cloak, and was careful to use the Rising Sun Lubricator for oiling  his chains.
I am bound to acknowledge that it was with a good deal of  difficulty that he brought himself to adopt this last mode of protection.
However, one night, while the family were at dinner, he slipped into Mr.  Otis’s bedroom and carried off the bottle.
He felt a little humiliated  at first, but afterwards was sensible enough to see that there was a  great deal to be said for the invention, and, to a certain degree, it  served his purpose.
Still, in spite of everything, he was not left  unmolested.
Strings were continually being stretched across the  corridor, over which he tripped in the dark, and on one occasion, while  dressed for the part of ‘Black Isaac, or the Huntsman of Hogley Woods,’  he met with a severe fall, through treading on a butter-slide, which the  twins had constructed from the entrance of the Tapestry Chamber to the  top of the oak staircase.
This last insult so enraged him, that he  resolved to make one final effort to assert his dignity and social  position, and determined to visit the insolent young Etonians the next  night in his celebrated character of ‘Reckless Rupert, or the Headless  Earl.’    He had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in  fact, not since he had so frightened pretty Lady Barbara Modish by means  of it, that she suddenly broke off her engagement with the present Lord  Canterville’s grandfather, and ran away to Gretna Green with handsome  Jack Castleton, declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to  marry into a family that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and  down the terrace at twilight.
Poor Jack was afterwards shot in a duel by  Lord Canterville on Wandsworth Common, and Lady Barbara died of a broken  heart at Tunbridge Wells before the year was out, so, in every way, it  had been a great success.
It was, however, an extremely difficult  ‘make-up,’ if I may use such a theatrical expression in connection with  one of the greatest mysteries of the supernatural, or, to employ a more  scientific term, the higher-natural world, and it took him fully three  hours to make his preparations.
At last everything was ready, and he was  very pleased with his appearance.
The big leather riding-boots that went  with the dress were just a little too large for him, and he could only  find one of the two horse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite  satisfied, and at a quarter past one he glided out of the wainscoting and  crept down the corridor.
On reaching the room occupied by the twins,  which I should mention was called the Blue Bed Chamber, on account of the  colour of its hangings, he found the door just ajar.
Wishing to make an  effective entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water fell  right down on him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his left  shoulder by a couple of inches.
At the same moment he heard stifled  shrieks of laughter proceeding from the four-post bed.
The shock to his  nervous system was so great that he fled back to his room as hard as he  could go, and the next day he was laid up with a severe cold.
The only  thing that at all consoled him in the whole affair was the fact that he  had not brought his head with him, for, had he done so, the consequences  might have been very serious.
He now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude American family,  and contented himself, as a rule, with creeping about the passages in  list slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of  draughts, and a small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the  twins.
The final blow he received occurred on the 19th of September.
He  had gone downstairs to the great entrance-hall, feeling sure that there,  at any rate, he would be quite unmolested, and was amusing himself by  making satirical remarks on the large Saroni photographs of the United  States Minister and his wife, which had now taken the place of the  Canterville family pictures.
He was simply but neatly clad in a long  shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaw with a strip  of yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton’s spade.
In  fact, he was dressed for the character of ‘Jonas the Graveless, or the  Corpse-Snatcher of Chertsey Barn,’ one of his most remarkable  impersonations, and one which the Cantervilles had every reason to  remember, as it was the real origin of their quarrel with their  neighbour, Lord Rufford.
It was about a quarter past two o’clock in the  morning, and, as far as he could ascertain, no one was stirring.
As he  was strolling towards the library, however, to see if there were any  traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on him from a  dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly above their heads,  and shrieked out ‘BOO!’ in his ear.
Seized with a panic, which, under the circumstances, was only natural, he  rushed for the staircase, but found Washington Otis waiting for him there  with the big garden-syringe; and being thus hemmed in by his enemies on  every side, and driven almost to bay, he vanished into the great iron  stove, which, fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to make his way  home through the flues and chimneys, arriving at his own room in a  terrible state of dirt, disorder, and despair.
After this he was not seen again on any nocturnal expedition.
The twins  lay in wait for him on several occasions, and strewed the passages with  nutshells every night to the great annoyance of their parents and the  servants, but it was of no avail.
It was quite evident that his feelings  were so wounded that he would not appear.
Mr. Otis consequently resumed  his great work on the history of the Democratic Party, on which he had  been engaged for some years; Mrs.
Otis organised a wonderful clam-bake,  which amazed the whole county; the boys took to lacrosse, euchre, poker,  and other American national games; and Virginia rode about the lanes on  her pony, accompanied by the young Duke of Cheshire, who had come to  spend the last week of his holidays at Canterville Chase.
It was  generally assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, in fact, Mr. Otis  wrote a letter to that effect to Lord Canterville, who, in reply,  expressed his great pleasure at the news, and sent his best  congratulations to the Minister’s worthy wife.
The Otises, however, were deceived, for the ghost was still in the house,  and though now almost an invalid, was by no means ready to let matters  rest, particularly as he heard that among the guests was the young Duke  of Cheshire, whose grand-uncle, Lord Francis Stilton, had once bet a  hundred guineas with Colonel Carbury that he would play dice with the  Canterville ghost, and was found the next morning lying on the floor of  the card-room in such a helpless paralytic state, that though he lived on  to a great age, he was never able to say anything again but ‘Double  Sixes.’  The story was well known at the time, though, of course, out of  respect to the feelings of the two noble families, every attempt was made  to hush it up; and a full account of all the circumstances connected with  it will be found in the third volume of Lord Tattle’s _Recollections of  the Prince Regent and his Friends_.
The ghost, then, was naturally very  anxious to show that he had not lost his influence over the Stiltons,  with whom, indeed, he was distantly connected, his own first cousin  having been married _en secondes noces_ to the Sieur de Bulkeley, from  whom, as every one knows, the Dukes of Cheshire are lineally descended.
Accordingly, he made arrangements for appearing to Virginia’s little  lover in his celebrated impersonation of ‘The Vampire Monk, or, the  Bloodless Benedictine,’ a performance so horrible that when old Lady  Startup saw it, which she did on one fatal New Year’s Eve, in the year  1764, she went off into the most piercing shrieks, which culminated in  violent apoplexy, and died in three days, after disinheriting the  Cantervilles, who were her nearest relations, and leaving all her money  to her London apothecary.
At the last moment, however, his terror of the  twins prevented his leaving his room, and the little Duke slept in peace  under the great feathered canopy in the Royal Bedchamber, and dreamed of  Virginia.
A FEW days after this, Virginia and her curly-haired cavalier went out  riding on Brockley meadows, where she tore her habit so badly in getting  through a hedge, that, on her return home, she made up her mind to go up  by the back staircase so as not to be seen.
As she was running past the  Tapestry Chamber, the door of which happened to be open, she fancied she  saw some one inside, and thinking it was her mother’s maid, who sometimes  used to bring her work there, looked in to ask her to mend her habit.
To  her immense surprise, however, it was the Canterville Ghost himself!  He  was sitting by the window, watching the ruined gold of the yellowing  trees fly through the air, and the red leaves dancing madly down the long  avenue.
His head was leaning on his hand, and his whole attitude was one  of extreme depression.
Indeed, so forlorn, and so much out of repair did  he look, that little Virginia, whose first idea had been to run away and  lock herself in her room, was filled with pity, and determined to try and  comfort him.
So light was her footfall, and so deep his melancholy, that  he was not aware of her presence till she spoke to him.
‘I am so sorry for you,’ she said, ‘but my brothers are going back to  Eton to-morrow, and then, if you behave yourself, no one will annoy you.’    ‘It is absurd asking me to behave myself,’ he answered, looking round in  astonishment at the pretty little girl who had ventured to address him,  ‘quite absurd.
I must rattle my chains, and groan through keyholes, and  walk about at night, if that is what you mean.
It is my only reason for  existing.’    ‘It is no reason at all for existing, and you know you have been very  wicked.
Mrs.
Umney told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had  killed your wife.’    ‘Well, I quite admit it,’ said the Ghost petulantly, ‘but it was a purely  family matter, and concerned no one else.’    ‘It is very wrong to kill any one,’ said Virginia, who at times had a  sweet Puritan gravity, caught from some old New England ancestor.
‘Oh, I hate the cheap severity of abstract ethics!  My wife was very  plain, never had my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing about  cookery.
Why, there was a buck I had shot in Hogley Woods, a magnificent  pricket, and do you know how she had it sent up to table?
However, it is  no matter now, for it is all over, and I don’t think it was very nice of  her brothers to starve me to death, though I did kill her.’    ‘Starve you to death?
Oh, Mr. Ghost, I mean Sir Simon, are you hungry?
I have a sandwich in my case.
Would you like it?’    ‘No, thank you, I never eat anything now; but it is very kind of you, all  the same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your horrid, rude,  vulgar, dishonest family.’    ‘Stop!’ cried Virginia, stamping her foot, ‘it is you who are rude, and  horrid, and vulgar, and as for dishonesty, you know you stole the paints  out of my box to try and furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain in the  library.
First you took all my reds, including the vermilion, and I  couldn’t do any more sunsets, then you took the emerald-green and the  chrome-yellow, and finally I had nothing left but indigo and Chinese  white, and could only do moonlight scenes, which are always depressing to  look at, and not at all easy to paint.
I never told on you, though I was  very much annoyed, and it was most ridiculous, the whole thing; for who  ever heard of emerald-green blood?’    ‘Well, really,’ said the Ghost, rather meekly, ‘what was I to do?
It is  a very difficult thing to get real blood nowadays, and, as your brother  began it all with his Paragon Detergent, I certainly saw no reason why I  should not have your paints.
As for colour, that is always a matter of  taste: the Cantervilles have blue blood, for instance, the very bluest in  England; but I know you Americans don’t care for things of this kind.’    ‘You know nothing about it, and the best thing you can do is to emigrate  and improve your mind.
My father will be only too happy to give you a  free passage, and though there is a heavy duty on spirits of every kind,  there will be no difficulty about the Custom House, as the officers are  all Democrats.
Once in New York, you are sure to be a great success.
I  know lots of people there who would give a hundred thousand dollars to  have a grandfather, and much more than that to have a family Ghost.’    ‘I don’t think I should like America.’    ‘I suppose because we have no ruins and no curiosities,’ said Virginia  satirically.
‘No ruins! no curiosities!’ answered the Ghost; ‘you have your navy and  your manners.’    ‘Good evening; I will go and ask papa to get the twins an extra week’s  holiday.’    ‘Please don’t go, Miss Virginia,’ he cried; ‘I am so lonely and so  unhappy, and I really don’t know what to do.
I want to go to sleep and I  cannot.’    ‘That’s quite absurd!  You have merely to go to bed and blow out the  candle.
It is very difficult sometimes to keep awake, especially at  church, but there is no difficulty at all about sleeping.
Why, even  babies know how to do that, and they are not very clever.’    ‘I have not slept for three hundred years,’ he said sadly, and Virginia’s  beautiful blue eyes opened in wonder; ‘for three hundred years I have not  slept, and I am so tired.’    Virginia grew quite grave, and her little lips trembled like rose-leaves.
She came towards him, and kneeling down at his side, looked up into his  old withered face.
‘Poor, poor Ghost,’ she murmured; ‘have you no place where you can  sleep?’    ‘Far away beyond the pine-woods,’ he answered, in a low dreamy voice,  ‘there is a little garden.
There the grass grows long and deep, there  are the great white stars of the hemlock flower, there the nightingale  sings all night long.
All night long he sings, and the cold, crystal  moon looks down, and the yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over the  sleepers.’    Virginia’s eyes grew dim with tears, and she hid her face in her hands.
‘You mean the Garden of Death,’ she whispered.
‘Yes, Death.
Death must be so beautiful.
To lie in the soft brown  earth, with the grasses waving above one’s head, and listen to silence.
To have no yesterday, and no to-morrow.
To forget time, to forgive life,  to be at peace.
You can help me.
You can open for me the portals of  Death’s house, for Love is always with you, and Love is stronger than  Death is.’    Virginia trembled, a cold shudder ran through her, and for a few moments  there was silence.
She felt as if she was in a terrible dream.
Then the Ghost spoke again, and his voice sounded like the sighing of the  wind.
‘Have you ever read the old prophecy on the library window?’    ‘Oh, often,’ cried the little girl, looking up; ‘I know it quite well.
It is painted in curious black letters, and it is difficult to read.
There are only six lines:        When a golden girl can win      Prayer from out the lips of sin,      When the barren almond bears,      And a little child gives away its tears,      Then shall all the house be still      And peace come to Canterville.
But I don’t know what they mean.’    ‘They mean,’ he said sadly, ‘that you must weep for me for my sins,  because I have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, because I have no  faith, and then, if you have always been sweet, and good, and gentle, the  Angel of Death will have mercy on me.
You will see fearful shapes in  darkness, and wicked voices will whisper in your ear, but they will not  harm you, for against the purity of a little child the powers of Hell  cannot prevail.’    Virginia made no answer, and the Ghost wrung his hands in wild despair as  he looked down at her bowed golden head.
Suddenly she stood up, very  pale, and with a strange light in her eyes.
‘I am not afraid,’ she said  firmly, ‘and I will ask the Angel to have mercy on you.’    He rose from his seat with a faint cry of joy, and taking her hand bent  over it with old-fashioned grace and kissed it.
His fingers were as cold  as ice, and his lips burned like fire, but Virginia did not falter, as he  led her across the dusky room.
On the faded green tapestry were  broidered little huntsmen.
They blew their tasselled horns and with  their tiny hands waved to her to go back.
‘Go back! little Virginia,’  they cried, ‘go back!’ but the Ghost clutched her hand more tightly, and  she shut her eyes against them.
Horrible animals with lizard tails, and  goggle eyes, blinked at her from the carven chimney-piece, and murmured  ‘Beware! little Virginia, beware! we may never see you again,’ but the  Ghost glided on more swiftly, and Virginia did not listen.
When they  reached the end of the room he stopped, and muttered some words she could  not understand.
She opened her eyes, and saw the wall slowly fading away  like a mist, and a great black cavern in front of her.
A bitter cold  wind swept round them, and she felt something pulling at her dress.
‘Quick, quick,’ cried the Ghost, ‘or it will be too late,’ and, in a  moment, the wainscoting had closed behind them, and the Tapestry Chamber  was empty.
ABOUT ten minutes later, the bell rang for tea, and, as Virginia did not  come down, Mrs.
Otis sent up one of the footmen to tell her.
After a  little time he returned and said that he could not find Miss Virginia  anywhere.
As she was in the habit of going out to the garden every  evening to get flowers for the dinner-table, Mrs.
Otis was not at all  alarmed at first, but when six o’clock struck, and Virginia did not  appear, she became really agitated, and sent the boys out to look for  her, while she herself and Mr. Otis searched every room in the house.
At  half-past six the boys came back and said that they could find no trace  of their sister anywhere.
They were all now in the greatest state of  excitement, and did not know what to do, when Mr. Otis suddenly  remembered that, some few days before, he had given a band of gypsies  permission to camp in the park.
He accordingly at once set off for  Blackfell Hollow, where he knew they were, accompanied by his eldest son  and two of the farm-servants.
The little Duke of Cheshire, who was  perfectly frantic with anxiety, begged hard to be allowed to go too, but  Mr. Otis would not allow him, as he was afraid there might be a scuffle.
On arriving at the spot, however, he found that the gypsies had gone, and  it was evident that their departure had been rather sudden, as the fire  was still burning, and some plates were lying on the grass.
Having sent  off Washington and the two men to scour the district, he ran home, and  despatched telegrams to all the police inspectors in the county, telling  them to look out for a little girl who had been kidnapped by tramps or  gypsies.
He then ordered his horse to be brought round, and, after  insisting on his wife and the three boys sitting down to dinner, rode off  down the Ascot Road with a groom.
He had hardly, however, gone a couple  of miles when he heard somebody galloping after him, and, looking round,  saw the little Duke coming up on his pony, with his face very flushed and  no hat.
‘I’m awfully sorry, Mr. Otis,’ gasped out the boy, ‘but I can’t  eat any dinner as long as Virginia is lost.
Please, don’t be angry with  me; if you had let us be engaged last year, there would never have been  all this trouble.
You won’t send me back, will you?
I can’t go!  I  won’t go!’    The Minister could not help smiling at the handsome young scapegrace, and  was a good deal touched at his devotion to Virginia, so leaning down from  his horse, he patted him kindly on the shoulders, and said, ‘Well, Cecil,  if you won’t go back I suppose you must come with me, but I must get you  a hat at Ascot.’    ‘Oh, bother my hat!  I want Virginia!’ cried the little Duke, laughing,  and they galloped on to the railway station.
There Mr. Otis inquired of  the station-master if any one answering the description of Virginia had  been seen on the platform, but could get no news of her.
The  station-master, however, wired up and down the line, and assured him that  a strict watch would be kept for her, and, after having bought a hat for  the little Duke from a linen-draper, who was just putting up his  shutters, Mr. Otis rode off to Bexley, a village about four miles away,  which he was told was a well-known haunt of the gypsies, as there was a  large common next to it.
Here they roused up the rural policeman, but  could get no information from him, and, after riding all over the common,  they turned their horses’ heads homewards, and reached the Chase about  eleven o’clock, dead-tired and almost heart-broken.
They found  Washington and the twins waiting for them at the gate-house with  lanterns, as the avenue was very dark.
Not the slightest trace of  Virginia had been discovered.
The gypsies had been caught on Brockley  meadows, but she was not with them, and they had explained their sudden  departure by saying that they had mistaken the date of Chorton Fair, and  had gone off in a hurry for fear they might be late.
Indeed, they had  been quite distressed at hearing of Virginia’s disappearance, as they  were very grateful to Mr. Otis for having allowed them to camp in his  park, and four of their number had stayed behind to help in the search.
The carp-pond had been dragged, and the whole Chase thoroughly gone over,  but without any result.
It was evident that, for that night at any rate,  Virginia was lost to them; and it was in a state of the deepest  depression that Mr. Otis and the boys walked up to the house, the groom  following behind with the two horses and the pony.
In the hall they  found a group of frightened servants, and lying on a sofa in the library  was poor Mrs.
Otis, almost out of her mind with terror and anxiety, and  having her forehead bathed with eau-de-cologne by the old housekeeper.
Mr. Otis at once insisted on her having something to eat, and ordered up  supper for the whole party.
It was a melancholy meal, as hardly any one  spoke, and even the twins were awestruck and subdued, as they were very  fond of their sister.
When they had finished, Mr. Otis, in spite of the  entreaties of the little Duke, ordered them all to bed, saying that  nothing more could be done that night, and that he would telegraph in the  morning to Scotland Yard for some detectives to be sent down immediately.
Just as they were passing out of the dining-room, midnight began to boom  from the clock tower, and when the last stroke sounded they heard a crash  and a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of thunder shook the house, a  strain of unearthly music floated through the air, a panel at the top of  the staircase flew back with a loud noise, and out on the landing,  looking very pale and white, with a little casket in her hand, stepped  Virginia.
In a moment they had all rushed up to her.
Mrs.
Otis clasped  her passionately in her arms, the Duke smothered her with violent kisses,  and the twins executed a wild war-dance round the group.
‘Good heavens! child, where have you been?’ said Mr. Otis, rather  angrily, thinking that she had been playing some foolish trick on them.
‘Cecil and I have been riding all over the country looking for you, and  your mother has been frightened to death.
You must never play these  practical jokes any more.’    ‘Except on the Ghost! except on the Ghost!’ shrieked the twins, as they  capered about.
‘My own darling, thank God you are found; you must never leave my side  again,’ murmured Mrs.
Otis, as she kissed the trembling child, and  smoothed the tangled gold of her hair.
‘Papa,’ said Virginia quietly, ‘I have been with the Ghost.
He is dead,  and you must come and see him.
He had been very wicked, but he was  really sorry for all that he had done, and he gave me this box of  beautiful jewels before he died.’    The whole family gazed at her in mute amazement, but she was quite grave  and serious; and, turning round, she led them through the opening in the  wainscoting down a narrow secret corridor, Washington following with a  lighted candle, which he had caught up from the table.
Finally, they  came to a great oak door, studded with rusty nails.
When Virginia  touched it, it swung back on its heavy hinges, and they found themselves  in a little low room, with a vaulted ceiling, and one tiny grated window.
Imbedded in the wall was a huge iron ring, and chained to it was a gaunt  skeleton, that was stretched out at full length on the stone floor, and  seemed to be trying to grasp with its long fleshless fingers an  old-fashioned trencher and ewer, that were placed just out of its reach.
The jug had evidently been once filled with water, as it was covered  inside with green mould.
There was nothing on the trencher but a pile of  dust.
Virginia knelt down beside the skeleton, and, folding her little  hands together, began to pray silently, while the rest of the party  looked on in wonder at the terrible tragedy whose secret was now  disclosed to them.
‘Hallo!’ suddenly exclaimed one of the twins, who had been looking out of  the window to try and discover in what wing of the house the room was  situated.
‘Hallo! the old withered almond-tree has blossomed.
I can see  the flowers quite plainly in the moonlight.’    ‘God has forgiven him,’ said Virginia gravely, as she rose to her feet,  and a beautiful light seemed to illumine her face.
‘What an angel you are!’ cried the young Duke, and he put his arm round  her neck and kissed her.
FOUR days after these curious incidents a funeral started from  Canterville Chase at about eleven o’clock at night.
The hearse was drawn  by eight black horses, each of which carried on its head a great tuft of  nodding ostrich-plumes, and the leaden coffin was covered by a rich  purple pall, on which was embroidered in gold the Canterville  coat-of-arms.
By the side of the hearse and the coaches walked the  servants with lighted torches, and the whole procession was wonderfully  impressive.
Lord Canterville was the chief mourner, having come up  specially from Wales to attend the funeral, and sat in the first carriage  along with little Virginia.
Then came the United States Minister and his  wife, then Washington and the three boys, and in the last carriage was  Mrs.
Umney.
It was generally felt that, as she had been frightened by  the ghost for more than fifty years of her life, she had a right to see  the last of him.
A deep grave had been dug in the corner of the  churchyard, just under the old yew-tree, and the service was read in the  most impressive manner by the Rev.
Augustus Dampier.
When the ceremony  was over, the servants, according to an old custom observed in the  Canterville family, extinguished their torches, and, as the coffin was  being lowered into the grave, Virginia stepped forward and laid on it a  large cross made of white and pink almond-blossoms.
As she did so, the  moon came out from behind a cloud, and flooded with its silent silver the  little churchyard, and from a distant copse a nightingale began to sing.
She thought of the ghost’s description of the Garden of Death, her eyes  became dim with tears, and she hardly spoke a word during the drive home.
The next morning, before Lord Canterville went up to town, Mr. Otis had  an interview with him on the subject of the jewels the ghost had given to  Virginia.
They were perfectly magnificent, especially a certain ruby  necklace with old Venetian setting, which was really a superb specimen of  sixteenth-century work, and their value was so great that Mr. Otis felt  considerable scruples about allowing his daughter to accept them.
‘My lord,’ he said, ‘I know that in this country mortmain is held to  apply to trinkets as well as to land, and it is quite clear to me that  these jewels are, or should be, heirlooms in your family.
I must beg  you, accordingly, to take them to London with you, and to regard them  simply as a portion of your property which has been restored to you under  certain strange conditions.
As for my daughter, she is merely a child,  and has as yet, I am glad to say, but little interest in such  appurtenances of idle luxury.
I am also informed by Mrs.
Otis, who, I  may say, is no mean authority upon Art—having had the privilege of  spending several winters in Boston when she was a girl—that these gems  are of great monetary worth, and if offered for sale would fetch a tall  price.
Under these circumstances, Lord Canterville, I feel sure that you  will recognise how impossible it would be for me to allow them to remain  in the possession of any member of my family; and, indeed, all such vain  gauds and toys, however suitable or necessary to the dignity of the  British aristocracy, would be completely out of place among those who  have been brought up on the severe, and I believe immortal, principles of  republican simplicity.
Perhaps I should mention that Virginia is very  anxious that you should allow her to retain the box as a memento of your  unfortunate but misguided ancestor.
As it is extremely old, and  consequently a good deal out of repair, you may perhaps think fit to  comply with her request.
For my own part, I confess I am a good deal  surprised to find a child of mine expressing sympathy with mediævalism in  any form, and can only account for it by the fact that Virginia was born  in one of your London suburbs shortly after Mrs.
Otis had returned from a  trip to Athens.’    Lord Canterville listened very gravely to the worthy Minister’s speech,  pulling his grey moustache now and then to hide an involuntary smile, and  when Mr. Otis had ended, he shook him cordially by the hand, and said,  ‘My dear sir, your charming little daughter rendered my unlucky ancestor,  Sir Simon, a very important service, and I and my family are much  indebted to her for her marvellous courage and pluck.
The jewels are  clearly hers, and, egad, I believe that if I were heartless enough to  take them from her, the wicked old fellow would be out of his grave in a  fortnight, leading me the devil of a life.
As for their being heirlooms,  nothing is an heirloom that is not so mentioned in a will or legal  document, and the existence of these jewels has been quite unknown.
I  assure you I have no more claim on them than your butler, and when Miss  Virginia grows up I daresay she will be pleased to have pretty things to  wear.
Besides, you forget, Mr. Otis, that you took the furniture and the  ghost at a valuation, and anything that belonged to the ghost passed at  once into your possession, as, whatever activity Sir Simon may have shown  in the corridor at night, in point of law he was really dead, and you  acquired his property by purchase.’    Mr. Otis was a good deal distressed at Lord Canterville’s refusal, and  begged him to reconsider his decision, but the good-natured peer was  quite firm, and finally induced the Minister to allow his daughter to  retain the present the ghost had given her, and when, in the spring of  1890, the young Duchess of Cheshire was presented at the Queen’s first  drawing-room on the occasion of her marriage, her jewels were the  universal theme of admiration.
For Virginia received the coronet, which  is the reward of all good little American girls, and was married to her  boy-lover as soon as he came of age.
They were both so charming, and  they loved each other so much, that every one was delighted at the match,  except the old Marchioness of Dumbleton, who had tried to catch the Duke  for one of her seven unmarried daughters, and had given no less than  three expensive dinner-parties for that purpose, and, strange to say, Mr.  Otis himself.
Mr. Otis was extremely fond of the young Duke personally,  but, theoretically, he objected to titles, and, to use his own words,  ‘was not without apprehension lest, amid the enervating influences of a  pleasure-loving aristocracy, the true principles of republican simplicity  should be forgotten.’  His objections, however, were completely  overruled, and I believe that when he walked up the aisle of St.  George’s, Hanover Square, with his daughter leaning on his arm, there was  not a prouder man in the whole length and breadth of England.
The Duke and Duchess, after the honeymoon was over, went down to  Canterville Chase, and on the day after their arrival they walked over in  the afternoon to the lonely churchyard by the pine-woods.
There had been  a great deal of difficulty at first about the inscription on Sir Simon’s  tombstone, but finally it had been decided to engrave on it simply the  initials of the old gentleman’s name, and the verse from the library  window.
The Duchess had brought with her some lovely roses, which she  strewed upon the grave, and after they had stood by it for some time they  strolled into the ruined chancel of the old abbey.
There the Duchess sat  down on a fallen pillar, while her husband lay at her feet smoking a  cigarette and looking up at her beautiful eyes.
Suddenly he threw his  cigarette away, took hold of her hand, and said to her, ‘Virginia, a wife  should have no secrets from her husband.’    ‘Dear Cecil!  I have no secrets from you.’    ‘Yes, you have,’ he answered, smiling, ‘you have never told me what  happened to you when you were locked up with the ghost.’    ‘I have never told any one, Cecil,’ said Virginia gravely.
‘I know that, but you might tell me.’    ‘Please don’t ask me, Cecil, I cannot tell you.
Poor Sir Simon!  I owe  him a great deal.
Yes, don’t laugh, Cecil, I really do.
He made me see  what Life is, and what Death signifies, and why Love is stronger than  both.’    The Duke rose and kissed his wife lovingly.
‘You can have your secret as long as I have your heart,’ he murmured.
‘You have always had that, Cecil.’    ‘And you will tell our children some day, won’t you?’    Virginia blushed.
THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET  AN ETCHING      ONE afternoon I was sitting outside the Café de la Paix, watching the  splendour and shabbiness of Parisian life, and wondering over my vermouth  at the strange panorama of pride and poverty that was passing before me,  when I heard some one call my name.
I turned round, and saw Lord  Murchison.
We had not met since we had been at college together, nearly  ten years before, so I was delighted to come across him again, and we  shook hands warmly.
At Oxford we had been great friends.
I had liked  him immensely, he was so handsome, so high-spirited, and so honourable.
We used to say of him that he would be the best of fellows, if he did not  always speak the truth, but I think we really admired him all the more  for his frankness.
I found him a good deal changed.
He looked anxious  and puzzled, and seemed to be in doubt about something.
I felt it could  not be modern scepticism, for Murchison was the stoutest of Tories, and  believed in the Pentateuch as firmly as he believed in the House of  Peers; so I concluded that it was a woman, and asked him if he was  married yet.
‘I don’t understand women well enough,’ he answered.
‘My dear Gerald,’ I said, ‘women are meant to be loved, not to be  understood.’    ‘I cannot love where I cannot trust,’ he replied.
‘I believe you have a mystery in your life, Gerald,’ I exclaimed; ‘tell  me about it.’    ‘Let us go for a drive,’ he answered, ‘it is too crowded here.
No, not a  yellow carriage, any other colour—there, that dark green one will do’;  and in a few moments we were trotting down the boulevard in the direction  of the Madeleine.
‘Where shall we go to?’ I said.
‘Oh, anywhere you like!’ he answered—‘to the restaurant in the Bois; we  will dine there, and you shall tell me all about yourself.’    ‘I want to hear about you first,’ I said.
‘Tell me your mystery.’    He took from his pocket a little silver-clasped morocco case, and handed  it to me.
I opened it.
Inside there was the photograph of a woman.
She  was tall and slight, and strangely picturesque with her large vague eyes  and loosened hair.
She looked like a _clairvoyante_, and was wrapped in  rich furs.
‘What do you think of that face?’ he said; ‘is it truthful?’    I examined it carefully.
It seemed to me the face of some one who had a  secret, but whether that secret was good or evil I could not say.
Its  beauty was a beauty moulded out of many mysteries—the beauty, in fact,  which is psychological, not plastic—and the faint smile that just played  across the lips was far too subtle to be really sweet.
‘Well,’ he cried impatiently, ‘what do you say?’    ‘She is the Gioconda in sables,’ I answered.
‘Let me know all about  her.’    ‘Not now,’ he said; ‘after dinner,’ and began to talk of other things.
When the waiter brought us our coffee and cigarettes I reminded Gerald of  his promise.
He rose from his seat, walked two or three times up and  down the room, and, sinking into an armchair, told me the following  story:—    ‘One evening,’ he said, ‘I was walking down Bond Street about five  o’clock.
There was a terrific crush of carriages, and the traffic was  almost stopped.
Close to the pavement was standing a little yellow  brougham, which, for some reason or other, attracted my attention.
As I  passed by there looked out from it the face I showed you this afternoon.
It fascinated me immediately.
All that night I kept thinking of it, and  all the next day.
I wandered up and down that wretched Row, peering into  every carriage, and waiting for the yellow brougham; but I could not find  _ma belle inconnue_, and at last I began to think she was merely a dream.
About a week afterwards I was dining with Madame de Rastail.
Dinner was  for eight o’clock; but at half-past eight we were still waiting in the  drawing-room.
Finally the servant threw open the door, and announced  Lady Alroy.
It was the woman I had been looking for.
She came in very  slowly, looking like a moonbeam in grey lace, and, to my intense delight,  I was asked to take her in to dinner.
After we had sat down, I remarked  quite innocently, “I think I caught sight of you in Bond Street some time  ago, Lady Alroy.”  She grew very pale, and said to me in a low voice,  “Pray do not talk so loud; you may be overheard.”  I felt miserable at  having made such a bad beginning, and plunged recklessly into the subject  of the French plays.
She spoke very little, always in the same low  musical voice, and seemed as if she was afraid of some one listening.
I  fell passionately, stupidly in love, and the indefinable atmosphere of  mystery that surrounded her excited my most ardent curiosity.
When she  was going away, which she did very soon after dinner, I asked her if I  might call and see her.
She hesitated for a moment, glanced round to see  if any one was near us, and then said, “Yes; to-morrow at a quarter to  five.”  I begged Madame de Rastail to tell me about her; but all that I  could learn was that she was a widow with a beautiful house in Park Lane,  and as some scientific bore began a dissertation on widows, as  exemplifying the survival of the matrimonially fittest, I left and went  home.
‘The next day I arrived at Park Lane punctual to the moment, but was told  by the butler that Lady Alroy had just gone out.
I went down to the club  quite unhappy and very much puzzled, and after long consideration wrote  her a letter, asking if I might be allowed to try my chance some other  afternoon.
I had no answer for several days, but at last I got a little  note saying she would be at home on Sunday at four and with this  extraordinary postscript: “Please do not write to me here again; I will  explain when I see you.”  On Sunday she received me, and was perfectly  charming; but when I was going away she begged of me, if I ever had  occasion to write to her again, to address my letter to “Mrs.
Knox, care  of Whittaker’s Library, Green Street.”  “There are reasons,” she said,  “why I cannot receive letters in my own house.”    ‘All through the season I saw a great deal of her, and the atmosphere of  mystery never left her.
Sometimes I thought that she was in the power of  some man, but she looked so unapproachable, that I could not believe it.
It was really very difficult for me to come to any conclusion, for she  was like one of those strange crystals that one sees in museums, which  are at one moment clear, and at another clouded.
At last I determined to  ask her to be my wife: I was sick and tired of the incessant secrecy that  she imposed on all my visits, and on the few letters I sent her.
I wrote  to her at the library to ask her if she could see me the following Monday  at six.
She answered yes, and I was in the seventh heaven of delight.
I  was infatuated with her: in spite of the mystery, I thought then—in  consequence of it, I see now.
No; it was the woman herself I loved.
The  mystery troubled me, maddened me.
Why did chance put me in its track?’    ‘You discovered it, then?’ I cried.
‘I fear so,’ he answered.
‘You can judge for yourself.’    ‘When Monday came round I went to lunch with my uncle, and about four  o’clock found myself in the Marylebone Road.
My uncle, you know, lives  in Regent’s Park.
I wanted to get to Piccadilly, and took a short cut  through a lot of shabby little streets.
Suddenly I saw in front of me  Lady Alroy, deeply veiled and walking very fast.
On coming to the last  house in the street, she went up the steps, took out a latch-key, and let  herself in.
“Here is the mystery,” I said to myself; and I hurried on  and examined the house.
It seemed a sort of place for letting lodgings.
On the doorstep lay her handkerchief, which she had dropped.
I picked it  up and put it in my pocket.
Then I began to consider what I should do.
I came to the conclusion that I had no right to spy on her, and I drove  down to the club.
At six I called to see her.
She was lying on a sofa,  in a tea-gown of silver tissue looped up by some strange moonstones that  she always wore.
She was looking quite lovely.
“I am so glad to see  you,” she said; “I have not been out all day.”  I stared at her in  amazement, and pulling the handkerchief out of my pocket, handed it to  her.
“You dropped this in Cumnor Street this afternoon, Lady Alroy,”  I  said very calmly.
She looked at me in terror but made no attempt to take  the handkerchief.
“What were you doing there?” I asked.
“What right  have you to question me?” she answered.
“The right of a man who loves  you,” I replied; “I came here to ask you to be my wife.”  She hid her  face in her hands, and burst into floods of tears.
“You must tell me,” I  continued.
She stood up, and, looking me straight in the face, said,  “Lord Murchison, there is nothing to tell you.”—“You went to meet some  one,” I cried; “this is your mystery.”  She grew dreadfully white, and  said, “I went to meet no one.”—“Can’t you tell the truth?” I exclaimed.
“I have told it,” she replied.
I was mad, frantic; I don’t know what I  said, but I said terrible things to her.
Finally I rushed out of the  house.
She wrote me a letter the next day; I sent it back unopened, and  started for Norway with Alan Colville.
After a month I came back, and  the first thing I saw in the _Morning Post_ was the death of Lady Alroy.
She had caught a chill at the Opera, and had died in five days of  congestion of the lungs.
I shut myself up and saw no one.
I had loved  her so much, I had loved her so madly.
Good God! how I had loved that  woman!’    ‘You went to the street, to the house in it?’ I said.
‘Yes,’ he answered.
‘One day I went to Cumnor Street.
I could not help it; I was tortured  with doubt.
I knocked at the door, and a respectable-looking woman  opened it to me.
I asked her if she had any rooms to let.
“Well, sir,”  she replied, “the drawing-rooms are supposed to be let; but I have not  seen the lady for three months, and as rent is owing on them, you can  have them.”—“Is this the lady?” I said, showing the photograph.
“That’s  her, sure enough,” she exclaimed; “and when is she coming back,  sir?”—“The lady is dead,” I replied.
“Oh sir, I hope not!” said the  woman; “she was my best lodger.
She paid me three guineas a week merely  to sit in my drawing-rooms now and then.”  “She met some one here?” I  said; but the woman assured me that it was not so, that she always came  alone, and saw no one.
“What on earth did she do here?” I cried.
“She  simply sat in the drawing-room, sir, reading books, and sometimes had  tea,” the woman answered.
I did not know what to say, so I gave her a  sovereign and went away.
Now, what do you think it all meant?
You don’t  believe the woman was telling the truth?’    ‘I do.’    ‘Then why did Lady Alroy go there?’    ‘My dear Gerald,’ I answered, ‘Lady Alroy was simply a woman with a mania  for mystery.
She took these rooms for the pleasure of going there with  her veil down, and imagining she was a heroine.
She had a passion for  secrecy, but she herself was merely a Sphinx without a secret.’    ‘Do you really think so?’    ‘I am sure of it,’ I replied.
He took out the morocco case, opened it, and looked at the photograph.
‘I wonder?’ he said at last.
THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE  A NOTE OF ADMIRATION      UNLESS one is wealthy there is no use in being a charming fellow.
Romance is the privilege of the rich, not the profession of the  unemployed.
The poor should be practical and prosaic.
It is better to  have a permanent income than to be fascinating.
These are the great  truths of modern life which Hughie Erskine never realised.
Poor Hughie!  Intellectually, we must admit, he was not of much importance.
He never  said a brilliant or even an ill-natured thing in his life.
But then he  was wonderfully good-looking, with his crisp brown hair, his clear-cut  profile, and his grey eyes.
He was as popular with men as he was with  women and he had every accomplishment except that of making money.
His  father had bequeathed him his cavalry sword and a _History of the  Peninsular War_ in fifteen volumes.
Hughie hung the first over his  looking-glass, put the second on a shelf between _Ruff’s Guide_ and  _Bailey’s Magazine_, and lived on two hundred a year that an old aunt  allowed him.
He had tried everything.
He had gone on the Stock Exchange  for six months; but what was a butterfly to do among bulls and bears?
He  had been a tea-merchant for a little longer, but had soon tired of pekoe  and souchong.
Then he had tried selling dry sherry.
That did not  answer; the sherry was a little too dry.
Ultimately he became nothing, a  delightful, ineffectual young man with a perfect profile and no  profession.
To make matters worse, he was in love.
The girl he loved was Laura  Merton, the daughter of a retired Colonel who had lost his temper and his  digestion in India, and had never found either of them again.
Laura  adored him, and he was ready to kiss her shoe-strings.
They were the  handsomest couple in London, and had not a penny-piece between them.
The  Colonel was very fond of Hughie, but would not hear of any engagement.
‘Come to me, my boy, when you have got ten thousand pounds of your own,  and we will see about it,’ he used to say; and Hughie looked very glum in  those days, and had to go to Laura for consolation.
One morning, as he was on his way to Holland Park, where the Mertons  lived, he dropped in to see a great friend of his, Alan Trevor.
Trevor  was a painter.
Indeed, few people escape that nowadays.
But he was also  an artist, and artists are rather rare.
Personally he was a strange  rough fellow, with a freckled face and a red ragged beard.
However, when  he took up the brush he was a real master, and his pictures were eagerly  sought after.
He had been very much attracted by Hughie at first, it  must be acknowledged, entirely on account of his personal charm.
‘The  only people a painter should know,’ he used to say, ‘are people who are  _bête_ and beautiful, people who are an artistic pleasure to look at and  an intellectual repose to talk to.
Men who are dandies and women who are  darlings rule the world, at least they should do so.’  However, after he  got to know Hughie better, he liked him quite as much for his bright,  buoyant spirits and his generous, reckless nature, and had given him the  permanent _entrée_ to his studio.
When Hughie came in he found Trevor putting the finishing touches to a  wonderful life-size picture of a beggar-man.
The beggar himself was  standing on a raised platform in a corner of the studio.
He was a  wizened old man, with a face like wrinkled parchment, and a most piteous  expression.
Over his shoulders was flung a coarse brown cloak, all tears  and tatters; his thick boots were patched and cobbled, and with one hand  he leant on a rough stick, while with the other he held out his battered  hat for alms.
‘What an amazing model!’ whispered Hughie, as he shook hands with his  friend.
‘An amazing model?’ shouted Trevor at the top of his voice; ‘I should  think so!  Such beggars as he are not to be met with every day.
A  _trouvaille_, _mon cher_; a living Velasquez!  My stars! what an etching  Rembrandt would have made of him!’    ‘Poor old chap!’ said Hughie, ‘how miserable he looks!  But I suppose, to  you painters, his face is his fortune?’    ‘Certainly,’ replied Trevor, ‘you don’t want a beggar to look happy, do  you?’    ‘How much does a model get for sitting?’ asked Hughie, as he found  himself a comfortable seat on a divan.
‘A shilling an hour.’    ‘And how much do you get for your picture, Alan?’    ‘Oh, for this I get two thousand!’    ‘Pounds?’    ‘Guineas.
Painters, poets, and physicians always get guineas.’    ‘Well, I think the model should have a percentage,’ cried Hughie,  laughing; ‘they work quite as hard as you do.’    ‘Nonsense, nonsense!  Why, look at the trouble of laying on the paint  alone, and standing all day long at one’s easel!  It’s all very well,  Hughie, for you to talk, but I assure you that there are moments when Art  almost attains to the dignity of manual labour.
But you mustn’t chatter;  I’m very busy.
Smoke a cigarette, and keep quiet.’    After some time the servant came in, and told Trevor that the framemaker  wanted to speak to him.
‘Don’t run away, Hughie,’ he said, as he went out, ‘I will be back in a  moment.’    The old beggar-man took advantage of Trevor’s absence to rest for a  moment on a wooden bench that was behind him.
He looked so forlorn and  wretched that Hughie could not help pitying him, and felt in his pockets  to see what money he had.
All he could find was a sovereign and some  coppers.
‘Poor old fellow,’ he thought to himself, ‘he wants it more  than I do, but it means no hansoms for a fortnight’; and he walked across  the studio and slipped the sovereign into the beggar’s hand.
The old man started, and a faint smile flitted across his withered lips.
‘Thank you, sir,’ he said, ‘thank you.’    Then Trevor arrived, and Hughie took his leave, blushing a little at what  he had done.
He spent the day with Laura, got a charming scolding for  his extravagance, and had to walk home.
That night he strolled into the Palette Club about eleven o’clock, and  found Trevor sitting by himself in the smoking-room drinking hock and  seltzer.
‘Well, Alan, did you get the picture finished all right?’ he said, as he  lit his cigarette.
‘Finished and framed, my boy!’ answered Trevor; ‘and, by the bye, you  have made a conquest.
That old model you saw is quite devoted to you.
I  had to tell him all about you—who you are, where you live, what your  income is, what prospects you have—’    ‘My dear Alan,’ cried Hughie, ‘I shall probably find him waiting for me  when I go home.
But of course you are only joking.
Poor old wretch!  I  wish I could do something for him.
I think it is dreadful that any one  should be so miserable.
I have got heaps of old clothes at home—do you  think he would care for any of them?
Why, his rags were falling to  bits.’    ‘But he looks splendid in them,’ said Trevor.
‘I wouldn’t paint him in a  frock coat for anything.
What you call rags I call romance.
What seems  poverty to you is picturesqueness to me.
However, I’ll tell him of your  offer.’    ‘Alan,’ said Hughie seriously, ‘you painters are a heartless lot.’    ‘An artist’s heart is his head,’ replied Trevor; ‘and besides, our  business is to realise the world as we see it, not to reform it as we  know it.
_À chacun son métier_.
And now tell me how Laura is.
The old  model was quite interested in her.’    ‘You don’t mean to say you talked to him about her?’ said Hughie.
‘Certainly I did.
He knows all about the relentless colonel, the lovely  Laura, and the £10,000.’    ‘You told that old beggar all my private affairs?’ cried Hughie, looking  very red and angry.
‘My dear boy,’ said Trevor, smiling, ‘that old beggar, as you call him,  is one of the richest men in Europe.
He could buy all London to-morrow  without overdrawing his account.
He has a house in every capital, dines  off gold plate, and can prevent Russia going to war when he chooses.’    ‘What on earth do you mean?’ exclaimed Hughie.
‘What I say,’ said Trevor.
‘The old man you saw to-day in the studio was  Baron Hausberg.
He is a great friend of mine, buys all my pictures and  that sort of thing, and gave me a commission a month ago to paint him as  a beggar.
_Que voulez-vous_?
_La fantaisie d’un millionnaire_!  And I  must say he made a magnificent figure in his rags, or perhaps I should  say in my rags; they are an old suit I got in Spain.’    ‘Baron Hausberg!’ cried Hughie.
‘Good heavens!  I gave him a sovereign!’  and he sank into an armchair the picture of dismay.
‘Gave him a sovereign!’ shouted Trevor, and he burst into a roar of  laughter.
‘My dear boy, you’ll never see it again.
_Son affaire c’est  l’argent des autres_.’    ‘I think you might have told me, Alan,’ said Hughie sulkily, ‘and not  have let me make such a fool of myself.’    ‘Well, to begin with, Hughie,’ said Trevor, ‘it never entered my mind  that you went about distributing alms in that reckless way.
I can  understand your kissing a pretty model, but your giving a sovereign to an  ugly one—by Jove, no!  Besides, the fact is that I really was not at home  to-day to any one; and when you came in I didn’t know whether Hausberg  would like his name mentioned.
You know he wasn’t in full dress.’    ‘What a duffer he must think me!’ said Hughie.
‘Not at all.
He was in the highest spirits after you left; kept  chuckling to himself and rubbing his old wrinkled hands together.
I  couldn’t make out why he was so interested to know all about you; but I  see it all now.
He’ll invest your sovereign for you, Hughie, pay you the  interest every six months, and have a capital story to tell after  dinner.’    ‘I am an unlucky devil,’ growled Hughie.
‘The best thing I can do is to  go to bed; and, my dear Alan, you mustn’t tell any one.
I shouldn’t dare  show my face in the Row.’    ‘Nonsense!  It reflects the highest credit on your philanthropic spirit,  Hughie.
And don’t run away.
Have another cigarette, and you can talk  about Laura as much as you like.’    However, Hughie wouldn’t stop, but walked home, feeling very unhappy, and  leaving Alan Trevor in fits of laughter.
The next morning, as he was at breakfast, the servant brought him up a  card on which was written, ‘Monsieur Gustave Naudin, _de la part de_ M.
le Baron Hausberg.’  ‘I suppose he has come for an apology,’ said Hughie  to himself; and he told the servant to show the visitor up.
An old gentleman with gold spectacles and grey hair came into the room,  and said, in a slight French accent, ‘Have I the honour of addressing  Monsieur Erskine?’    Hughie bowed.
‘I have come from Baron Hausberg,’ he continued.
‘The Baron—’    ‘I beg, sir, that you will offer him my sincerest apologies,’ stammered  Hughie.
‘The Baron,’ said the old gentleman with a smile, ‘has commissioned me to  bring you this letter’; and he extended a sealed envelope.
On the outside was written, ‘A wedding present to Hugh Erskine and Laura  Merton, from an old beggar,’ and inside was a cheque for £10,000.
When they were married Alan Trevor was the best man, and the Baron made a  speech at the wedding breakfast.
‘Millionaire models,’ remarked Alan, ‘are rare enough; but, by Jove,  model millionaires are rarer still!’          THE PORTRAIT OF MR.
W.
H.
I HAD been dining with Erskine in his pretty little house in Birdcage  Walk, and we were sitting in the library over our coffee and cigarettes,  when the question of literary forgeries happened to turn up in  conversation.
I cannot at present remember how it was that we struck  upon this somewhat curious topic, as it was at that time, but I know that  we had a long discussion about Macpherson, Ireland, and Chatterton, and  that with regard to the last I insisted that his so-called forgeries were  merely the result of an artistic desire for perfect representation; that  we had no right to quarrel with an artist for the conditions under which  he chooses to present his work; and that all Art being to a certain  degree a mode of acting, an attempt to realise one’s own personality on  some imaginative plane out of reach of the trammelling accidents and  limitations of real life, to censure an artist for a forgery was to  confuse an ethical with an æsthetical problem.
Erskine, who was a good deal older than I was, and had been listening to  me with the amused deference of a man of forty, suddenly put his hand  upon my shoulder and said to me, ‘What would you say about a young man  who had a strange theory about a certain work of art, believed in his  theory, and committed a forgery in order to prove it?’    ‘Ah! that is quite a different matter,’ I answered.
Erskine remained silent for a few moments, looking at the thin grey  threads of smoke that were rising from his cigarette.
‘Yes,’ he said,  after a pause, ‘quite different.’    There was something in the tone of his voice, a slight touch of  bitterness perhaps, that excited my curiosity.
‘Did you ever know  anybody who did that?’ I cried.
‘Yes,’ he answered, throwing his cigarette into the fire,—‘a great friend  of mine, Cyril Graham.
He was very fascinating, and very foolish, and  very heartless.
However, he left me the only legacy I ever received in  my life.’    ‘What was that?’ I exclaimed.
Erskine rose from his seat, and going over  to a tall inlaid cabinet that stood between the two windows, unlocked it,  and came back to where I was sitting, holding in his hand a small panel  picture set in an old and somewhat tarnished Elizabethan frame.
It was a full-length portrait of a young man in late sixteenth-century  costume, standing by a table, with his right hand resting on an open  book.
He seemed about seventeen years of age, and was of quite  extraordinary personal beauty, though evidently somewhat effeminate.
Indeed, had it not been for the dress and the closely cropped hair, one  would have said that the face with its dreamy wistful eyes, and its  delicate scarlet lips, was the face of a girl.
In manner, and especially  in the treatment of the hands, the picture reminded one of François  Clouet’s later work.
The black velvet doublet with its fantastically  gilded points, and the peacock-blue background against which it showed up  so pleasantly, and from which it gained such luminous value of colour,  were quite in Clouet’s style; and the two masks of Tragedy and Comedy  that hung somewhat formally from the marble pedestal had that hard  severity of touch—so different from the facile grace of the  Italians—which even at the Court of France the great Flemish master never  completely lost, and which in itself has always been a characteristic of  the northern temper.
‘It is a charming thing,’ I cried, ‘but who is this wonderful young man,  whose beauty Art has so happily preserved for us?’    ‘This is the portrait of Mr. W.
H.,’ said Erskine, with a sad smile.
It  might have been a chance effect of light, but it seemed to me that his  eyes were quite bright with tears.
‘Mr. W.
H.!’ I exclaimed; ‘who was Mr. W.
H.?’    ‘Don’t you remember?’ he answered; ‘look at the book on which his hand is  resting.’    ‘I see there is some writing there, but I cannot make it out,’ I replied.
‘Take this magnifying-glass and try,’ said Erskine, with the same sad  smile still playing about his mouth.
I took the glass, and moving the lamp a little nearer, I began to spell  out the crabbed sixteenth-century handwriting.
‘To the onlie begetter of  these insuing sonnets.’ .
.
.
‘Good heavens!’ I cried, ‘is this  Shakespeare’s Mr. W.
H.?’    ‘Cyril Graham used to say so,’ muttered Erskine.
‘But it is not a bit like Lord Pembroke,’ I answered.
‘I know the  Penshurst portraits very well.
I was staying near there a few weeks  ago.’    ‘Do you really believe then that the sonnets are addressed to Lord  Pembroke?’ he asked.
‘I am sure of it,’ I answered.
‘Pembroke, Shakespeare, and Mrs.
Mary  Fitton are the three personages of the Sonnets; there is no doubt at all  about it.’    ‘Well, I agree with you,’ said Erskine, ‘but I did not always think so.
I used to believe—well, I suppose I used to believe in Cyril Graham and  his theory.’    ‘And what was that?’ I asked, looking at the wonderful portrait, which  had already begun to have a strange fascination for me.
‘It is a long story,’ said Erskine, taking the picture away from  me—rather abruptly I thought at the time—‘a very long story; but if you  care to hear it, I will tell it to you.’    ‘I love theories about the Sonnets,’ I cried; ‘but I don’t think I am  likely to be converted to any new idea.
The matter has ceased to be a  mystery to any one.
Indeed, I wonder that it ever was a mystery.’    ‘As I don’t believe in the theory, I am not likely to convert you to it,’  said Erskine, laughing; ‘but it may interest you.’    ‘Tell it to me, of course,’ I answered.
‘If it is half as delightful as  the picture, I shall be more than satisfied.’    ‘Well,’ said Erskine, lighting a cigarette, ‘I must begin by telling you  about Cyril Graham himself.
He and I were at the same house at Eton.
I  was a year or two older than he was, but we were immense friends, and did  all our work and all our play together.
There was, of course, a good  deal more play than work, but I cannot say that I am sorry for that.
It  is always an advantage not to have received a sound commercial education,  and what I learned in the playing fields at Eton has been quite as useful  to me as anything I was taught at Cambridge.
I should tell you that  Cyril’s father and mother were both dead.
They had been drowned in a  horrible yachting accident off the Isle of Wight.
His father had been in  the diplomatic service, and had married a daughter, the only daughter, in  fact, of old Lord Crediton, who became Cyril’s guardian after the death  of his parents.
I don’t think that Lord Crediton cared very much for  Cyril.
He had never really forgiven his daughter for marrying a man who  had not a title.
He was an extraordinary old aristocrat, who swore like  a costermonger, and had the manners of a farmer.
I remember seeing him  once on Speech-day.
He growled at me, gave me a sovereign, and told me  not to grow up “a damned Radical” like my father.
Cyril had very little  affection for him, and was only too glad to spend most of his holidays  with us in Scotland.
They never really got on together at all.
Cyril  thought him a bear, and he thought Cyril effeminate.
He was effeminate,  I suppose, in some things, though he was a very good rider and a capital  fencer.
In fact he got the foils before he left Eton.
But he was very  languid in his manner, and not a little vain of his good looks, and had a  strong objection to football.
The two things that really gave him  pleasure were poetry and acting.
At Eton he was always dressing up and  reciting Shakespeare, and when we went up to Trinity he became a member  of the A.D.C. his first term.
I remember I was always very jealous of  his acting.
I was absurdly devoted to him; I suppose because we were so  different in some things.
I was a rather awkward, weakly lad, with huge  feet, and horribly freckled.
Freckles run in Scotch families just as  gout does in English families.
Cyril used to say that of the two he  preferred the gout; but he always set an absurdly high value on personal  appearance, and once read a paper before our debating society to prove  that it was better to be good-looking than to be good.
He certainly was  wonderfully handsome.
People who did not like him, Philistines and  college tutors, and young men reading for the Church, used to say that he  was merely pretty; but there was a great deal more in his face than mere  prettiness.
I think he was the most splendid creature I ever saw, and  nothing could exceed the grace of his movements, the charm of his manner.
He fascinated everybody who was worth fascinating, and a great many  people who were not.
He was often wilful and petulant, and I used to  think him dreadfully insincere.
It was due, I think, chiefly to his  inordinate desire to please.
Poor Cyril!  I told him once that he was  contented with very cheap triumphs, but he only laughed.
He was horribly  spoiled.
All charming people, I fancy, are spoiled.
It is the secret of  their attraction.
‘However, I must tell you about Cyril’s acting.
You know that no  actresses are allowed to play at the A.D.C.  At least they were not in my  time.
I don’t know how it is now.
Well, of course, Cyril was always  cast for the girls’ parts, and when _As You Like It_ was produced he  played Rosalind.
It was a marvellous performance.
In fact, Cyril Graham  was the only perfect Rosalind I have ever seen.
It would be impossible  to describe to you the beauty, the delicacy, the refinement of the whole  thing.
It made an immense sensation, and the horrid little theatre, as  it was then, was crowded every night.
Even when I read the play now I  can’t help thinking of Cyril.
It might have been written for him.
The  next term he took his degree, and came to London to read for the  diplomatic.
But he never did any work.
He spent his days in reading  Shakespeare’s Sonnets, and his evenings at the theatre.
He was, of  course, wild to go on the stage.
It was all that I and Lord Crediton  could do to prevent him.
Perhaps if he had gone on the stage he would be  alive now.
It is always a silly thing to give advice, but to give good  advice is absolutely fatal.
I hope you will never fall into that error.
If you do, you will be sorry for it.
‘Well, to come to the real point of the story, one day I got a letter  from Cyril asking me to come round to his rooms that evening.
He had  charming chambers in Piccadilly overlooking the Green Park, and as I used  to go to see him every day, I was rather surprised at his taking the  trouble to write.
Of course I went, and when I arrived I found him in a  state of great excitement.
He told me that he had at last discovered the  true secret of Shakespeare’s Sonnets; that all the scholars and critics  had been entirely on the wrong tack; and that he was the first who,  working purely by internal evidence, had found out who Mr. W.
H.
really  was.
He was perfectly wild with delight, and for a long time would not  tell me his theory.
Finally, he produced a bundle of notes, took his  copy of the Sonnets off the mantelpiece, and sat down and gave me a long  lecture on the whole subject.
‘He began by pointing out that the young man to whom Shakespeare  addressed these strangely passionate poems must have been somebody who  was a really vital factor in the development of his dramatic art, and  that this could not be said either of Lord Pembroke or Lord Southampton.
Indeed, whoever he was, he could not have been anybody of high birth, as  was shown very clearly by the 25th Sonnet, in which Shakespeare  contrasting himself with those who are “great princes’ favourites,” says  quite frankly—        Let those who are in favour with their stars      Of public honour and proud titles boast,      Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,      Unlook’d for joy in that I honour most.
And ends the sonnet by congratulating himself on the mean state of him he  so adored.
Then happy I, that love and am beloved      Where I may not remove nor be removed.
This sonnet Cyril declared would be quite unintelligible if we fancied  that it was addressed to either the Earl of Pembroke or the Earl of  Southampton, both of whom were men of the highest position in England and  fully entitled to be called “great princes”; and he in corroboration of  his view read me Sonnets CXXIV.
and CXXV., in which Shakespeare tells us  that his love is not “the child of state,” that it “suffers not in  smiling pomp,” but is “builded far from accident.”  I listened with a  good deal of interest, for I don’t think the point had ever been made  before; but what followed was still more curious, and seemed to me at the  time to dispose entirely of Pembroke’s claim.
We know from Meres that  the Sonnets had been written before 1598, and Sonnet CIV.
informs us that  Shakespeare’s friendship for Mr. W.
H.
had been already in existence for  three years.
Now Lord Pembroke, who was born in 1580, did not come to  London till he was eighteen years of age, that is to say till 1598, and  Shakespeare’s acquaintance with Mr. W.
H.
must have begun in 1594, or at  the latest in 1595.
Shakespeare, accordingly, could not have known Lord  Pembroke till after the Sonnets had been written.
‘Cyril pointed out also that Pembroke’s father did not die till 1601;  whereas it was evident from the line,        You had a father; let your son say so,    that the father of Mr. W.
H.
was dead in 1598.
Besides, it was absurd to  imagine that any publisher of the time, and the preface is from the  publisher’s hand, would have ventured to address William Herbert, Earl of  Pembroke, as Mr. W.
H.; the case of Lord Buckhurst being spoken of as Mr.  Sackville being not really a parallel instance, as Lord Buckhurst was not  a peer, but merely the younger son of a peer, with a courtesy title, and  the passage in _England’s Parnassus_, where he is so spoken of, is not a  formal and stately dedication, but simply a casual allusion.
So far for  Lord Pembroke, whose supposed claims Cyril easily demolished while I sat  by in wonder.
With Lord Southampton Cyril had even less difficulty.
Southampton became at a very early age the lover of Elizabeth Vernon, so  he needed no entreaties to marry; he was not beautiful; he did not  resemble his mother, as Mr. W.
H.
did—        Thou art thy mother’s glass, and she in thee      Calls back the lovely April of her prime;    and, above all, his Christian name was Henry, whereas the punning sonnets  (CXXXV.
and CXLIII.) show that the Christian name of Shakespeare’s friend  was the same as his own—_Will_.
‘As for the other suggestions of unfortunate commentators, that Mr. W.
H.
is a misprint for Mr. W.
S., meaning Mr. William Shakespeare; that “Mr.  W.
H.
all” should be read “Mr. W.
Hall”; that Mr. W.
H.
is Mr. William  Hathaway; and that a full stop should be placed after “wisheth,” making  Mr. W.
H.
the writer and not the subject of the dedication,—Cyril got rid  of them in a very short time; and it is not worth while to mention his  reasons, though I remember he sent me off into a fit of laughter by  reading to me, I am glad to say not in the original, some extracts from a  German commentator called Barnstorff, who insisted that Mr. W.
H.
was no  less a person than “Mr. William Himself.”  Nor would he allow for a  moment that the Sonnets are mere satires on the work of Drayton and John  Davies of Hereford.
To him, as indeed to me, they were poems of serious  and tragic import, wrung out of the bitterness of Shakespeare’s heart,  and made sweet by the honey of his lips.
Still less would he admit that  they were merely a philosophical allegory, and that in them Shakespeare  is addressing his Ideal Self, or Ideal Manhood, or the Spirit of Beauty,  or the Reason, or the Divine Logos, or the Catholic Church.
He felt, as  indeed I think we all must feel, that the Sonnets are addressed to an  individual,—to a particular young man whose personality for some reason  seems to have filled the soul of Shakespeare with terrible joy and no  less terrible despair.
‘Having in this manner cleared the way as it were, Cyril asked me to  dismiss from my mind any preconceived ideas I might have formed on the  subject, and to give a fair and unbiassed hearing to his own theory.
The  problem he pointed out was this: Who was that young man of Shakespeare’s  day who, without being of noble birth or even of noble nature, was  addressed by him in terms of such passionate adoration that we can but  wonder at the strange worship, and are almost afraid to turn the key that  unlocks the mystery of the poet’s heart?
Who was he whose physical  beauty was such that it became the very corner-stone of Shakespeare’s  art; the very source of Shakespeare’s inspiration; the very incarnation  of Shakespeare’s dreams?
To look upon him as simply the object of  certain love-poems is to miss the whole meaning of the poems: for the art  of which Shakespeare talks in the Sonnets is not the art of the Sonnets  themselves, which indeed were to him but slight and secret things—it is  the art of the dramatist to which he is always alluding; and he to whom  Shakespeare said—              Thou art all my art, and dost advance      As high as learning my rude ignorance,    he to whom he promised immortality,        Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men,—    was surely none other than the boy-actor for whom he created Viola and  Imogen, Juliet and Rosalind, Portia and Desdemona, and Cleopatra herself.
This was Cyril Graham’s theory, evolved as you see purely from the  Sonnets themselves, and depending for its acceptance not so much on  demonstrable proof or formal evidence, but on a kind of spiritual and  artistic sense, by which alone he claimed could the true meaning of the  poems be discerned.
I remember his reading to me that fine sonnet—        How can my Muse want subject to invent,      While thou dost breathe, that pour’st into my verse      Thine own sweet argument, too excellent      For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me      Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;      For who’s so dumb that cannot write to thee,      When thou thyself dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth      Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;      And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth      Eternal numbers to outlive long date—    and pointing out how completely it corroborated his theory; and indeed he  went through all the Sonnets carefully, and showed, or fancied that he  showed, that, according to his new explanation of their meaning, things  that had seemed obscure, or evil, or exaggerated, became clear and  rational, and of high artistic import, illustrating Shakespeare’s  conception of the true relations between the art of the actor and the art  of the dramatist.
‘It is of course evident that there must have been in Shakespeare’s  company some wonderful boy-actor of great beauty, to whom he intrusted  the presentation of his noble heroines; for Shakespeare was a practical  theatrical manager as well as an imaginative poet, and Cyril Graham had  actually discovered the boy-actor’s name.
He was Will, or, as he  preferred to call him, Willie Hughes.
The Christian name he found of  course in the punning sonnets, CXXXV.
and CXLIII.; the surname was,  according to him, hidden in the seventh line of the 20th Sonnet, where  Mr. W.
H.
is described as—        A man in hew, all _Hews_ in his controwling.
‘In the original edition of the Sonnets “Hews” is printed with a capital  letter and in italics, and this, he claimed, showed clearly that a play  on words was intended, his view receiving a good deal of corroboration  from those sonnets in which curious puns are made on the words “use” and  “usury.”  Of course I was converted at once, and Willie Hughes became to  me as real a person as Shakespeare.
The only objection I made to the  theory was that the name of Willie Hughes does not occur in the list of  the actors of Shakespeare’s company as it is printed in the first folio.
Cyril, however, pointed out that the absence of Willie Hughes’s name from  this list really corroborated the theory, as it was evident from Sonnet  LXXXVI.
that Willie Hughes had abandoned Shakespeare’s company to play at  a rival theatre, probably in some of Chapman’s plays.
It is in reference  to this that in the great sonnet on Chapman, Shakespeare said to Willie  Hughes—        But when your countenance fill’d up his line,      Then lack’d I matter; that enfeebled mine—    the expression “when your countenance filled up his line” referring  obviously to the beauty of the young actor giving life and reality and  added charm to Chapman’s verse, the same idea being also put forward in  the 79th Sonnet—        Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,      My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;      But now my gracious numbers are decay’d,      And my sick Muse doth give another place;    and in the immediately preceding sonnet, where Shakespeare says—              Every alien pen has got my _use_      And under thee their poesy disperse,    the play upon words (use=Hughes) being of course obvious, and the phrase  “under thee their poesy disperse,” meaning “by your assistance as an  actor bring their plays before the people.”    ‘It was a wonderful evening, and we sat up almost till dawn reading and  re-reading the Sonnets.
After some time, however, I began to see that  before the theory could be placed before the world in a really perfected  form, it was necessary to get some independent evidence about the  existence of this young actor, Willie Hughes.
If this could be once  established, there could be no possible doubt about his identity with Mr.  W.
H.; but otherwise the theory would fall to the ground.
I put this  forward very strongly to Cyril, who was a good deal annoyed at what he  called my Philistine tone of mind, and indeed was rather bitter upon the  subject.
However, I made him promise that in his own interest he would  not publish his discovery till he had put the whole matter beyond the  reach of doubt; and for weeks and weeks we searched the registers of City  churches, the Alleyn MSS.
at Dulwich, the Record Office, the papers of  the Lord Chamberlain—everything, in fact, that we thought might contain  some allusion to Willie Hughes.
We discovered nothing, of course, and  every day the existence of Willie Hughes seemed to me to become more  problematical.
Cyril was in a dreadful state, and used to go over the  whole question day after day, entreating me to believe; but I saw the one  flaw in the theory, and I refused to be convinced till the actual  existence of Willie Hughes, a boy-actor of Elizabethan days, had been  placed beyond the reach of doubt or cavil.
‘One day Cyril left town to stay with his grandfather, I thought at the  time, but I afterwards heard from Lord Crediton that this was not the  case; and about a fortnight afterwards I received a telegram from him,  handed in at Warwick, asking me to be sure to come and dine with him that  evening at eight o’clock.
When I arrived, he said to me, “The only  apostle who did not deserve proof was St. Thomas, and St. Thomas was the  only apostle who got it.”  I asked him what he meant.
He answered that  he had not merely been able to establish the existence in the sixteenth  century of a boy-actor of the name of Willie Hughes, but to prove by the  most conclusive evidence that he was the Mr. W.
H.
of the Sonnets.
He  would not tell me anything more at the time; but after dinner he solemnly  produced the picture I showed you, and told me that he had discovered it  by the merest chance nailed to the side of an old chest that he had  bought at a farmhouse in Warwickshire.
The chest itself, which was a  very fine example of Elizabethan work, he had, of course, brought with  him, and in the centre of the front panel the initials W.
H.
were  undoubtedly carved.
It was this monogram that had attracted his  attention, and he told me that it was not till he had had the chest in  his possession for several days that he had thought of making any careful  examination of the inside.
One morning, however, he saw that one of the  sides of the chest was much thicker than the other, and looking more  closely, he discovered that a framed panel picture was clamped against  it.
On taking it out, he found it was the picture that is now lying on  the sofa.
It was very dirty, and covered with mould; but he managed to  clean it, and, to his great joy, saw that he had fallen by mere chance on  the one thing for which he had been looking.
Here was an authentic  portrait of Mr. W.
H., with his hand resting on the dedicatory page of  the Sonnets, and on the frame itself could be faintly seen the name of  the young man written in black uncial letters on a faded gold ground,  “Master Will.
Hews.”    ‘Well, what was I to say?
It never occurred to me for a moment that  Cyril Graham was playing a trick on me, or that he was trying to prove  his theory by means of a forgery.’    ‘But is it a forgery?’ I asked.
‘Of course it is,’ said Erskine.
‘It is a very good forgery; but it is a  forgery none the less.
I thought at the time that Cyril was rather calm  about the whole matter; but I remember he more than once told me that he  himself required no proof of the kind, and that he thought the theory  complete without it.
I laughed at him, and told him that without it the  theory would fall to the ground, and I warmly congratulated him on the  marvellous discovery.
We then arranged that the picture should be etched  or facsimiled, and placed as the frontispiece to Cyril’s edition of the  Sonnets; and for three months we did nothing but go over each poem line  by line, till we had settled every difficulty of text or meaning.
One  unlucky day I was in a print-shop in Holborn, when I saw upon the counter  some extremely beautiful drawings in silver-point.
I was so attracted by  them that I bought them; and the proprietor of the place, a man called  Rawlings, told me that they were done by a young painter of the name of  Edward Merton, who was very clever, but as poor as a church mouse.
I  went to see Merton some days afterwards, having got his address from the  printseller, and found a pale, interesting young man, with a rather  common-looking wife—his model, as I subsequently learned.
I told him how  much I admired his drawings, at which he seemed very pleased, and I asked  him if he would show me some of his other work.
As we were looking over  a portfolio, full of really very lovely things,—for Merton had a most  delicate and delightful touch,—I suddenly caught sight of a drawing of  the picture of Mr. W.
H.
There was no doubt whatever about it.
It was  almost a _facsimile_—the only difference being that the two masks of  Tragedy and Comedy were not suspended from the marble table as they are  in the picture, but were lying on the floor at the young man’s feet.
“Where on earth did you get that?” I said.
He grew rather confused, and  said—“Oh, that is nothing.
I did not know it was in this portfolio.
It  is not a thing of any value.”  “It is what you did for Mr. Cyril Graham,”  exclaimed his wife; “and if this gentleman wishes to buy it, let him have  it.”  “For Mr. Cyril Graham?” I repeated.
“Did you paint the picture of  Mr. W.
H.?”  “I don’t understand what you mean,” he answered, growing  very red.
Well, the whole thing was quite dreadful.
The wife let it all  out.
I gave her five pounds when I was going away.
I can’t bear to  think of it now; but of course I was furious.
I went off at once to  Cyril’s chambers, waited there for three hours before he came in, with  that horrid lie staring me in the face, and told him I had discovered his  forgery.
He grew very pale and said—“I did it purely for your sake.
You  would not be convinced in any other way.
It does not affect the truth of  the theory.”  “The truth of the theory!” I exclaimed; “the less we talk  about that the better.
You never even believed in it yourself.
If you  had, you would not have committed a forgery to prove it.”  High words  passed between us; we had a fearful quarrel.
I dare say I was unjust.
The next morning he was dead.’    ‘Dead!’ I cried,    ‘Yes; he shot himself with a revolver.
Some of the blood splashed upon  the frame of the picture, just where the name had been painted.
By the  time I arrived—his servant had sent for me at once—the police were  already there.
He had left a letter for me, evidently written in the  greatest agitation and distress of mind.’    ‘What was in it?’ I asked.
‘Oh, that he believed absolutely in Willie Hughes; that the forgery of  the picture had been done simply as a concession to me, and did not in  the slightest degree invalidate the truth of the theory; and, that in  order to show me how firm and flawless his faith in the whole thing was,  he was going to offer his life as a sacrifice to the secret of the  Sonnets.
It was a foolish, mad letter.
I remember he ended by saying  that he intrusted to me the Willie Hughes theory, and that it was for me  to present it to the world, and to unlock the secret of Shakespeare’s  heart.’    ‘It is a most tragic story,’ I cried; ‘but why have you not carried out  his wishes?’    Erskine shrugged his shoulders.
‘Because it is a perfectly unsound  theory from beginning to end,’ he answered.
‘My dear Erskine,’ I said, getting up from my seat, ‘you are entirely  wrong about the whole matter.
It is the only perfect key to  Shakespeare’s Sonnets that has ever been made.
It is complete in every  detail.
I believe in Willie Hughes.’    ‘Don’t say that,’ said Erskine gravely; ‘I believe there is something  fatal about the idea, and intellectually there is nothing to be said for  it.
I have gone into the whole matter, and I assure you the theory is  entirely fallacious.
It is plausible up to a certain point.
Then it  stops.
For heaven’s sake, my dear boy, don’t take up the subject of  Willie Hughes.
You will break your heart over it.’    ‘Erskine,’ I answered, ‘it is your duty to give this theory to the world.
If you will not do it, I will.
By keeping it back you wrong the memory  of Cyril Graham, the youngest and the most splendid of all the martyrs of  literature.
I entreat you to do him justice.
He died for this  thing,—don’t let his death be in vain.’    Erskine looked at me in amazement.
‘You are carried away by the  sentiment of the whole story,’ he said.
‘You forget that a thing is not  necessarily true because a man dies for it.
I was devoted to Cyril  Graham.
His death was a horrible blow to me.
I did not recover it for  years.
I don’t think I have ever recovered it.
But Willie Hughes?
There is nothing in the idea of Willie Hughes.
No such person ever  existed.
As for bringing the whole thing before the world—the world  thinks that Cyril Graham shot himself by accident.
The only proof of his  suicide was contained in the letter to me, and of this letter the public  never heard anything.
To the present day Lord Crediton thinks that the  whole thing was accidental.’    ‘Cyril Graham sacrificed his life to a great Idea,’ I answered; ‘and if  you will not tell of his martyrdom, tell at least of his faith.’    ‘His faith,’ said Erskine, ‘was fixed in a thing that was false, in a  thing that was unsound, in a thing that no Shakespearean scholar would  accept for a moment.
The theory would be laughed at.
Don’t make a fool  of yourself, and don’t follow a trail that leads nowhere.
You start by  assuming the existence of the very person whose existence is the thing to  be proved.
Besides, everybody knows that the Sonnets were addressed to  Lord Pembroke.
The matter is settled once for all.’    ‘The matter is not settled!’ I exclaimed.
‘I will take up the theory  where Cyril Graham left it, and I will prove to the world that he was  right.’    ‘Silly boy!’ said Erskine.
‘Go home: it is after two, and don’t think  about Willie Hughes any more.
I am sorry I told you anything about it,  and very sorry indeed that I should have converted you to a thing in  which I don’t believe.’    ‘You have given me the key to the greatest mystery of modern literature,’  I answered; ‘and I shall not rest till I have made you recognise, till I  have made everybody recognise, that Cyril Graham was the most subtle  Shakespearean critic of our day.’    As I walked home through St. James’s Park the dawn was just breaking over  London.
The white swans were lying asleep on the polished lake, and the  gaunt Palace looked purple against the pale-green sky.
I thought of  Cyril Graham, and my eyes filled with tears.
IT was past twelve o’clock when I awoke, and the sun was streaming in  through the curtains of my room in long slanting beams of dusty gold.
I  told my servant that I would be at home to no one; and after I had had a  cup of chocolate and a _petit-pain_, I took down from the book-shelf my  copy of Shakespeare’s Sonnets, and began to go carefully through them.
Every poem seemed to me to corroborate Cyril Graham’s theory.
I felt as  if I had my hand upon Shakespeare’s heart, and was counting each separate  throb and pulse of passion.
I thought of the wonderful boy-actor, and  saw his face in every line.
Two sonnets, I remember, struck me particularly: they were the 53rd and  the 67th.
In the first of these, Shakespeare, complimenting Willie  Hughes on the versatility of his acting, on his wide range of parts, a  range extending from Rosalind to Juliet, and from Beatrice to Ophelia,  says to him—        What is your substance, whereof are you made,      That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,      And you, but one, can every shadow lend—    lines that would be unintelligible if they were not addressed to an  actor, for the word ‘shadow’ had in Shakespeare’s day a technical meaning  connected with the stage.
‘The best in this kind are but shadows,’ says  Theseus of the actors in the _Midsummer Night’s Dream_, and there are  many similar allusions in the literature of the day.
These sonnets  evidently belonged to the series in which Shakespeare discusses the  nature of the actor’s art, and of the strange and rare temperament that  is essential to the perfect stage-player.
‘How is it,’ says Shakespeare  to Willie Hughes, ‘that you have so many personalities?’ and then he goes  on to point out that his beauty is such that it seems to realise every  form and phase of fancy, to embody each dream of the creative  imagination—an idea that is still further expanded in the sonnet that  immediately follows, where, beginning with the fine thought,        O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem      By that sweet ornament which _truth_ doth give!    Shakespeare invites us to notice how the truth of acting, the truth of  visible presentation on the stage, adds to the wonder of poetry, giving  life to its loveliness, and actual reality to its ideal form.
And yet,  in the 67th Sonnet, Shakespeare calls upon Willie Hughes to abandon the  stage with its artificiality, its false mimic life of painted face and  unreal costume, its immoral influences and suggestions, its remoteness  from the true world of noble action and sincere utterance.
Ah, wherefore with infection should he live      And with his presence grace impiety,      That sin by him advantage should achieve      And lace itself with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,      And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek      Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
It may seem strange that so great a dramatist as Shakespeare, who  realised his own perfection as an artist and his humanity as a man on the  ideal plane of stage-writing and stage-playing, should have written in  these terms about the theatre; but we must remember that in Sonnets CX.
and CXI.
Shakespeare shows us that he too was wearied of the world of  puppets, and full of shame at having made himself ‘a motley to the view.’  The 111th Sonnet is especially bitter:—        O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,      The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,      That did not better for my life provide      Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,      And almost thence my nature is subdued      To what it works in, like the dyer’s hand:      Pity me then and wish I were renew’d—    and there are many signs elsewhere of the same feeling, signs familiar to  all real students of Shakespeare.
One point puzzled me immensely as I read the Sonnets, and it was days  before I struck on the true interpretation, which indeed Cyril Graham  himself seems to have missed.
I could not understand how it was that  Shakespeare set so high a value on his young friend marrying.
He himself  had married young, and the result had been unhappiness, and it was not  likely that he would have asked Willie Hughes to commit the same error.
The boy-player of Rosalind had nothing to gain from marriage, or from the  passions of real life.
The early sonnets, with their strange entreaties  to have children, seemed to me a jarring note.
The explanation of the  mystery came on me quite suddenly, and I found it in the curious  dedication.
It will be remembered that the dedication runs as follows:—                               TO THE ONLIE BEGETTER OF                              THESE INSUING SONNETS                             MR.
W.
H.
ALL HAPPINESSE                                AND THAT ETERNITIE                                     PROMISED                                        BY                               OUR EVER-LIVING POET                                     WISHETH                                 THE WELL-WISHING                                  ADVENTURER IN                                     SETTING                                      FORTH.
T.
T.
Some scholars have supposed that the word ‘begetter’ in this dedication  means simply the procurer of the Sonnets for Thomas Thorpe the publisher;  but this view is now generally abandoned, and the highest authorities are  quite agreed that it is to be taken in the sense of inspirer, the  metaphor being drawn from the analogy of physical life.
Now I saw that  the same metaphor was used by Shakespeare himself all through the poems,  and this set me on the right track.
Finally I made my great discovery.
The marriage that Shakespeare proposes for Willie Hughes is the marriage  with his Muse, an expression which is definitely put forward in the 82nd  Sonnet, where, in the bitterness of his heart at the defection of the  boy-actor for whom he had written his greatest parts, and whose beauty  had indeed suggested them, he opens his complaint by saying—        I grant thou wert not married to my Muse.
The children he begs him to beget are no children of flesh and blood, but  more immortal children of undying fame.
The whole cycle of the early  sonnets is simply Shakespeare’s invitation to Willie Hughes to go upon  the stage and become a player.
How barren and profitless a thing, he  says, is this beauty of yours if it be not used:—        When forty winters shall besiege thy brow      And dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field,      Thy youth’s proud livery, so gazed on now,      Will be a tatter’d weed, of small worth held:      Then being ask’d where all thy beauty lies,      Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,      To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes,      Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
You must create something in art: my verse ‘is thine, and _born_ of  thee’; only listen to me, and I will ‘_bring forth_ eternal numbers to  outlive long date,’ and you shall people with forms of your own image the  imaginary world of the stage.
These children that you beget, he  continues, will not wither away, as mortal children do, but you shall  live in them and in my plays: do but—        Make thee another self, for love of me,      That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
I collected all the passages that seemed to me to corroborate this view,  and they produced a strong impression on me, and showed me how complete  Cyril Graham’s theory really was.
I also saw that it was quite easy to  separate those lines in which he speaks of the Sonnets themselves from  those in which he speaks of his great dramatic work.
This was a point  that had been entirely overlooked by all critics up to Cyril Graham’s  day.
And yet it was one of the most important points in the whole series  of poems.
To the Sonnets Shakespeare was more or less indifferent.
He  did not wish to rest his fame on them.
They were to him his ‘slight  Muse,’ as he calls them, and intended, as Meres tells us, for private  circulation only among a few, a very few, friends.
Upon the other hand  he was extremely conscious of the high artistic value of his plays, and  shows a noble self-reliance upon his dramatic genius.
When he says to  Willie Hughes:        But thy eternal summer shall not fade,      Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;      Nor shall Death brag thou wander’st in his shade,      When in _eternal lines_ to time thou grow’st:      So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,      So long lives this, and this gives life to thee;—    the expression ‘eternal lines’ clearly alludes to one of his plays that  he was sending him at the time, just as the concluding couplet points to  his confidence in the probability of his plays being always acted.
In  his address to the Dramatic Muse (Sonnets C.
and CI.), we find the same  feeling.
Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget’st so long      To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend’st thou thy fury on some worthless song,      Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
he cries, and he then proceeds to reproach the Mistress of Tragedy and  Comedy for her ‘neglect of Truth in Beauty dyed,’ and says—        Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, for ‘t lies in thee      To make him much outlive a gilded tomb      And to be praised of ages yet to be.
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how      To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
It is, however, perhaps in the 55th Sonnet that Shakespeare gives to this  idea its fullest expression.
To imagine that the ‘powerful rhyme’ of the  second line refers to the sonnet itself, is to mistake Shakespeare’s  meaning entirely.
It seemed to me that it was extremely likely, from the  general character of the sonnet, that a particular play was meant, and  that the play was none other but _Romeo and Juliet_.
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments      Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;      But you shall shine more bright in these contents      Than unswept stone besmear’d with sluttish time.
When wasteful wars shall statues overturn,      And broils root out the work of masonry,      Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn      The living record of your memory.
‘Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity      Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room      Even in the eyes of all posterity      That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So, till the judgement that yourself arise,      You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.
It was also extremely suggestive to note how here as elsewhere  Shakespeare promised Willie Hughes immortality in a form that appealed to  men’s eyes—that is to say, in a spectacular form, in a play that is to be  looked at.
For two weeks I worked hard at the Sonnets, hardly ever going out, and  refusing all invitations.
Every day I seemed to be discovering something  new, and Willie Hughes became to me a kind of spiritual presence, an  ever-dominant personality.
I could almost fancy that I saw him standing  in the shadow of my room, so well had Shakespeare drawn him, with his  golden hair, his tender flower-like grace, his dreamy deep-sunken eyes,  his delicate mobile limbs, and his white lily hands.
His very name  fascinated me.
Willie Hughes!  Willie Hughes!  How musically it sounded!  Yes; who else but he could have been the master-mistress of Shakespeare’s  passion, {1} the lord of his love to whom he was bound in vassalage, {2}  the delicate minion of pleasure, {3} the rose of the whole world, {4} the  herald of the spring {5} decked in the proud livery of youth, {6} the  lovely boy whom it was sweet music to hear, {7} and whose beauty was the  very raiment of Shakespeare’s heart, {8} as it was the keystone of his  dramatic power?
How bitter now seemed the whole tragedy of his desertion  and his shame!—shame that he made sweet and lovely {9} by the mere magic  of his personality, but that was none the less shame.
Yet as Shakespeare  forgave him, should not we forgive him also?
I did not care to pry into  the mystery of his sin.
His abandonment of Shakespeare’s theatre was a different matter, and I  investigated it at great length.
Finally I came to the conclusion that  Cyril Graham had been wrong in regarding the rival dramatist of the 80th  Sonnet as Chapman.
It was obviously Marlowe who was alluded to.
At the  time the Sonnets were written, such an expression as ‘the proud full sail  of his great verse’ could not have been used of Chapman’s work, however  applicable it might have been to the style of his later Jacobean plays.
No: Marlowe was clearly the rival dramatist of whom Shakespeare spoke in  such laudatory terms; and that                    Affable familiar ghost      Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,    was the Mephistopheles of his _Doctor Faustus_.
No doubt, Marlowe was  fascinated by the beauty and grace of the boy-actor, and lured him away  from the Blackfriars Theatre, that he might play the Gaveston of his  _Edward II_.
That Shakespeare had the legal right to retain Willie  Hughes in his own company is evident from Sonnet LXXXVII., where he  says:—        Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,      And like enough thou know’st thy estimate:      The _charter of thy worth_ gives thee releasing;      My _bonds_ in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,      _And so my patent back again is swerving_.
Thyself thou gayest, thy own worth then not knowing,      Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;      So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,      Comes home again, on better judgement making.
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,         In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
But him whom he could not hold by love, he would not hold by force.
Willie Hughes became a member of Lord Pembroke’s company, and, perhaps in  the open yard of the Red Bull Tavern, played the part of King Edward’s  delicate minion.
On Marlowe’s death, he seems to have returned to  Shakespeare, who, whatever his fellow-partners may have thought of the  matter, was not slow to forgive the wilfulness and treachery of the young  actor.
How well, too, had Shakespeare drawn the temperament of the stage-player!  Willie Hughes was one of those        That do not do the thing they most do show,      Who, moving others, are themselves as stone.
He could act love, but could not feel it, could mimic passion without  realising it.
In many’s looks the false heart’s history      Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,    but with Willie Hughes it was not so.
‘Heaven,’ says Shakespeare, in a  sonnet of mad idolatry—           Heaven in thy creation did decree      That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;      Whate’er thy thoughts or thy heart’s workings be,      Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
In his ‘inconstant mind’ and his ‘false heart,’ it was easy to recognise  the insincerity and treachery that somehow seem inseparable from the  artistic nature, as in his love of praise that desire for immediate  recognition that characterises all actors.
And yet, more fortunate in  this than other actors, Willie Hughes was to know something of  immortality.
Inseparably connected with Shakespeare’s plays, he was to  live in them.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,      Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:      The earth can yield me but a common grave,      When you entombed in men’s eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,      Which eyes not yet created shall o’er-read,      And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,      When all the breathers of this world are dead.
There were endless allusions, also, to Willie Hughes’s power over his  audience—the ‘gazers,’ as Shakespeare calls them; but perhaps the most  perfect description of his wonderful mastery over dramatic art was in _A  Lover’s Complaint_, where Shakespeare says of him:—        In him a plenitude of subtle matter,      Applied to cautels, all strange forms receives,      Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,      Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,      In either’s aptness, as it best deceives,      To blush at speeches rank, to weep at woes,      Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows.
* * * * *        So on the tip of his subduing tongue,      All kind of arguments and questions deep,      All replication prompt and reason strong,      For his advantage still did wake and sleep,      To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep.
He had the dialect and the different skill,         Catching all passions in his craft of will.
Once I thought that I had really found Willie Hughes in Elizabethan  literature.
In a wonderfully graphic account of the last days of the  great Earl of Essex, his chaplain, Thomas Knell, tells us that the night  before the Earl died, ‘he called William Hewes, which was his musician,  to play upon the virginals and to sing.
“Play,” said he, “my song, Will  Hewes, and I will sing it to myself.”  So he did it most joyfully, not as  the howling swan, which, still looking down, waileth her end, but as a  sweet lark, lifting up his hands and casting up his eyes to his God, with  this mounted the crystal skies, and reached with his unwearied tongue the  top of highest heavens.’  Surely the boy who played on the virginals to  the dying father of Sidney’s Stella was none other but the Will Hews to  whom Shakespeare dedicated the Sonnets, and who he tells us was himself  sweet ‘music to hear.’  Yet Lord Essex died in 1576, when Shakespeare  himself was but twelve years of age.
It was impossible that his musician  could have been the Mr. W.
H.
of the Sonnets.
Perhaps Shakespeare’s  young friend was the son of the player upon the virginals?
It was at  least something to have discovered that Will Hews was an Elizabethan  name.
Indeed the name Hews seemed to have been closely connected with  music and the stage.
The first English actress was the lovely Margaret  Hews, whom Prince Rupert so madly loved.
What more probable than that  between her and Lord Essex’s musician had come the boy-actor of  Shakespeare’s plays?
But the proofs, the links—where were they?
Alas! I  could not find them.
It seemed to me that I was always on the brink of  absolute verification, but that I could never really attain to it.
From Willie Hughes’s life I soon passed to thoughts of his death.
I used  to wonder what had been his end.
Perhaps he had been one of those English actors who in 1604 went across  sea to Germany and played before the great Duke Henry Julius of  Brunswick, himself a dramatist of no mean order, and at the Court of that  strange Elector of Brandenburg, who was so enamoured of beauty that he  was said to have bought for his weight in amber the young son of a  travelling Greek merchant, and to have given pageants in honour of his  slave all through that dreadful famine year of 1606–7, when the people  died of hunger in the very streets of the town, and for the space of  seven months there was no rain.
We know at any rate that _Romeo and  Juliet_ was brought out at Dresden in 1613, along with _Hamlet_ and _King  Lear_, and it was surely to none other than Willie Hughes that in 1615  the death-mask of Shakespeare was brought by the hand of one of the suite  of the English ambassador, pale token of the passing away of the great  poet who had so dearly loved him.
Indeed there would have been something  peculiarly fitting in the idea that the boy-actor, whose beauty had been  so vital an element in the realism and romance of Shakespeare’s art,  should have been the first to have brought to Germany the seed of the new  culture, and was in his way the precursor of that _Aufklärung_ or  Illumination of the eighteenth century, that splendid movement which,  though begun by Lessing and Herder, and brought to its full and perfect  issue by Goethe, was in no small part helped on by another  actor—Friedrich Schroeder—who awoke the popular consciousness, and by  means of the feigned passions and mimetic methods of the stage showed the  intimate, the vital, connection between life and literature.
If this was  so—and there was certainly no evidence against it—it was not improbable  that Willie Hughes was one of those English comedians (_mimæ quidam ex  Britannia_, as the old chronicle calls them), who were slain at Nuremberg  in a sudden uprising of the people, and were secretly buried in a little  vineyard outside the city by some young men ‘who had found pleasure in  their performances, and of whom some had sought to be instructed in the  mysteries of the new art.’  Certainly no more fitting place could there  be for him to whom Shakespeare said, ‘thou art all my art,’ than this  little vineyard outside the city walls.
For was it not from the sorrows  of Dionysos that Tragedy sprang?
Was not the light laughter of Comedy,  with its careless merriment and quick replies, first heard on the lips of  the Sicilian vine-dressers?
Nay, did not the purple and red stain of the  wine-froth on face and limbs give the first suggestion of the charm and  fascination of disguise—the desire for self-concealment, the sense of the  value of objectivity thus showing itself in the rude beginnings of the  art?
At any rate, wherever he lay—whether in the little vineyard at the  gate of the Gothic town, or in some dim London churchyard amidst the roar  and bustle of our great city—no gorgeous monument marked his  resting-place.
His true tomb, as Shakespeare saw, was the poet’s verse,  his true monument the permanence of the drama.
So had it been with  others whose beauty had given a new creative impulse to their age.
The  ivory body of the Bithynian slave rots in the green ooze of the Nile, and  on the yellow hills of the Cerameicus is strewn the dust of the young  Athenian; but Antinous lives in sculpture, and Charmides in philosophy.
AFTER three weeks had elapsed, I determined to make a strong appeal to  Erskine to do justice to the memory of Cyril Graham, and to give to the  world his marvellous interpretation of the Sonnets—the only  interpretation that thoroughly explained the problem.
I have not any  copy of my letter, I regret to say, nor have I been able to lay my hand  upon the original; but I remember that I went over the whole ground, and  covered sheets of paper with passionate reiteration of the arguments and  proofs that my study had suggested to me.
It seemed to me that I was not  merely restoring Cyril Graham to his proper place in literary history,  but rescuing the honour of Shakespeare himself from the tedious memory of  a commonplace intrigue.
I put into the letter all my enthusiasm.
I put  into the letter all my faith.
No sooner, in fact, had I sent it off than a curious reaction came over  me.
It seemed to me that I had given away my capacity for belief in the  Willie Hughes theory of the Sonnets, that something had gone out of me,  as it were, and that I was perfectly indifferent to the whole subject.
What was it that had happened?
It is difficult to say.
Perhaps, by  finding perfect expression for a passion, I had exhausted the passion  itself.
Emotional forces, like the forces of physical life, have their  positive limitations.
Perhaps the mere effort to convert any one to a  theory involves some form of renunciation of the power of credence.
Perhaps I was simply tired of the whole thing, and, my enthusiasm having  burnt out, my reason was left to its own unimpassioned judgment.
However  it came about, and I cannot pretend to explain it, there was no doubt  that Willie Hughes suddenly became to me a mere myth, an idle dream, the  boyish fancy of a young man who, like most ardent spirits, was more  anxious to convince others than to be himself convinced.
As I had said some very unjust and bitter things to Erskine in my letter,  I determined to go and see him at once, and to make my apologies to him  for my behaviour.
Accordingly, the next morning I drove down to Birdcage  Walk, and found Erskine sitting in his library, with the forged picture  of Willie Hughes in front of him.
‘My dear Erskine!’ I cried, ‘I have come to apologise to you.’    ‘To apologise to me?’ he said.
‘What for?’    ‘For my letter,’ I answered.
‘You have nothing to regret in your letter,’ he said.
‘On the contrary,  you have done me the greatest service in your power.
You have shown me  that Cyril Graham’s theory is perfectly sound.’    ‘You don’t mean to say that you believe in Willie Hughes?’ I exclaimed.
‘Why not?’ he rejoined.
‘You have proved the thing to me.
Do you think  I cannot estimate the value of evidence?’    ‘But there is no evidence at all,’ I groaned, sinking into a chair.
‘When I wrote to you I was under the influence of a perfectly silly  enthusiasm.
I had been touched by the story of Cyril Graham’s death,  fascinated by his romantic theory, enthralled by the wonder and novelty  of the whole idea.
I see now that the theory is based on a delusion.
The only evidence for the existence of Willie Hughes is that picture in  front of you, and the picture is a forgery.
Don’t be carried away by  mere sentiment in this matter.
Whatever romance may have to say about  the Willie Hughes theory, reason is dead against it.’    ‘I don’t understand you,’ said Erskine, looking at me in amazement.
‘Why, you yourself have convinced me by your letter that Willie Hughes is  an absolute reality.
Why have you changed your mind?
Or is all that you  have been saying to me merely a joke?’    ‘I cannot explain it to you,’ I rejoined, ‘but I see now that there is  really nothing to be said in favour of Cyril Graham’s interpretation.
The Sonnets are addressed to Lord Pembroke.
For heaven’s sake don’t  waste your time in a foolish attempt to discover a young Elizabethan  actor who never existed, and to make a phantom puppet the centre of the  great cycle of Shakespeare’s Sonnets.’    ‘I see that you don’t understand the theory,’ he replied.
‘My dear Erskine,’ I cried, ‘not understand it!  Why, I feel as if I had  invented it.
Surely my letter shows you that I not merely went into the  whole matter, but that I contributed proofs of every kind.
The one flaw  in the theory is that it presupposes the existence of the person whose  existence is the subject of dispute.
If we grant that there was in  Shakespeare’s company a young actor of the name of Willie Hughes, it is  not difficult to make him the object of the Sonnets.
But as we know that  there was no actor of this name in the company of the Globe Theatre, it  is idle to pursue the investigation further.’    ‘But that is exactly what we don’t know,’ said Erskine.
‘It is quite  true that his name does not occur in the list given in the first folio;  but, as Cyril pointed out, that is rather a proof in favour of the  existence of Willie Hughes than against it, if we remember his  treacherous desertion of Shakespeare for a rival dramatist.’    We argued the matter over for hours, but nothing that I could say could  make Erskine surrender his faith in Cyril Graham’s interpretation.
He  told me that he intended to devote his life to proving the theory, and  that he was determined to do justice to Cyril Graham’s memory.
I  entreated him, laughed at him, begged of him, but it was of no use.
Finally we parted, not exactly in anger, but certainly with a shadow  between us.
He thought me shallow, I thought him foolish.
When I called  on him again his servant told me that he had gone to Germany.
Two years afterwards, as I was going into my club, the hall-porter handed  me a letter with a foreign postmark.
It was from Erskine, and written at  the Hôtel d’Angleterre, Cannes.
When I had read it I was filled with  horror, though I did not quite believe that he would be so mad as to  carry his resolve into execution.
The gist of the letter was that he had  tried in every way to verify the Willie Hughes theory, and had failed,  and that as Cyril Graham had given his life for this theory, he himself  had determined to give his own life also to the same cause.
The  concluding words of the letter were these: ‘I still believe in Willie  Hughes; and by the time you receive this, I shall have died by my own  hand for Willie Hughes’s sake: for his sake, and for the sake of Cyril  Graham, whom I drove to his death by my shallow scepticism and ignorant  lack of faith.
The truth was once revealed to you, and you rejected it.
It comes to you now stained with the blood of two lives,—do not turn away  from it.’    It was a horrible moment.
I felt sick with misery, and yet I could not  believe it.
To die for one’s theological beliefs is the worst use a man  can make of his life, but to die for a literary theory!  It seemed  impossible.
I looked at the date.
The letter was a week old.
Some unfortunate  chance had prevented my going to the club for several days, or I might  have got it in time to save him.
Perhaps it was not too late.
I drove  off to my rooms, packed up my things, and started by the night-mail from  Charing Cross.
The journey was intolerable.
I thought I would never  arrive.
As soon as I did I drove to the Hôtel l’Angleterre.
They told  me that Erskine had been buried two days before in the English cemetery.
There was something horribly grotesque about the whole tragedy.
I said  all kinds of wild things, and the people in the hall looked curiously at  me.
Suddenly Lady Erskine, in deep mourning, passed across the vestibule.
When she saw me she came up to me, murmured something about her poor son,  and burst into tears.
I led her into her sitting-room.
An elderly  gentleman was there waiting for her.
It was the English doctor.
We talked a great deal about Erskine, but I said nothing about his motive  for committing suicide.
It was evident that he had not told his mother  anything about the reason that had driven him to so fatal, so mad an act.
Finally Lady Erskine rose and said, George left you something as a  memento.
It was a thing he prized very much.
I will get it for you.
As soon as she had left the room I turned to the doctor and said, ‘What a  dreadful shock it must have been to Lady Erskine!  I wonder that she  bears it as well as she does.’    ‘Oh, she knew for months past that it was coming,’ he answered.
‘Knew it for months past!’ I cried.
‘But why didn’t she stop him?
Why  didn’t she have him watched?
He must have been mad.’    The doctor stared at me.
‘I don’t know what you mean,’ he said.
‘Well,’ I cried, ‘if a mother knows that her son is going to commit  suicide—’    ‘Suicide!’ he answered.
‘Poor Erskine did not commit suicide.
He died  of consumption.
He came here to die.
The moment I saw him I knew that  there was no hope.
One lung was almost gone, and the other was very much  affected.
Three days before he died he asked me was there any hope.
I  told him frankly that there was none, and that he had only a few days to  live.
He wrote some letters, and was quite resigned, retaining his  senses to the last.’    At that moment Lady Erskine entered the room with the fatal picture of  Willie Hughes in her hand.
‘When George was dying he begged me to give  you this,’ she said.
As I took it from her, her tears fell on my hand.
The picture hangs now in my library, where it is very much admired by my  artistic friends.
They have decided that it is not a Clouet, but an  Oudry.
I have never cared to tell them its true history.
But sometimes,  when I look at it, I think that there is really a great deal to be said  for the Willie Hughes theory of Shakespeare’s Sonnets.High above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the Happy Prince.
He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold, for eyes he had two bright sapphires, and a large red ruby glowed on his sword-hilt.
He was very much admired indeed.
“He is as beautiful as a weathercock,” remarked one of the Town Councillors who wished to gain a reputation for having artistic tastes; “only not quite so useful,” he added, fearing lest people should think him unpractical, which he really was not.
“Why can’t you be like the Happy Prince?” asked a sensible mother of her little boy who was crying for the moon.
“The Happy Prince never dreams of crying for anything.”  “I am glad there is some one in the world who is quite happy,” muttered a disappointed man as he gazed at the wonderful statue.
“He looks just like an angel,” said the Charity Children as they came out of the cathedral in their bright scarlet cloaks and their clean white pinafores.
“How do you know?” said the Mathematical Master, “you have never seen one.”  “Ah! but we have, in our dreams,” answered the children; and the Mathematical Master frowned and looked very severe, for he did not approve of children dreaming.
One night there flew over the city a little Swallow.
His friends had gone away to Egypt six weeks before, but he had stayed behind, for he was in love with the most beautiful Reed.
He had met her early in the spring as he was flying down the river after a big yellow moth, and had been so attracted by her slender waist that he had stopped to talk to her.
“Shall I love you?” said the Swallow, who liked to come to the point at once, and the Reed made him a low bow.
So he flew round and round her, touching the water with his wings, and making silver ripples.
This was his courtship, and it lasted all through the summer.
“It is a ridiculous attachment,” twittered the other Swallows; “she has no money, and far too many relations”; and indeed the river was quite full of Reeds.
Then, when the autumn came they all flew away.
After they had gone he felt lonely, and began to tire of his lady-love.
“She has no conversation,” he said, “and I am afraid that she is a coquette, for she is always flirting with the wind.”  And certainly, whenever the wind blew, the Reed made the most graceful curtseys.
“I admit that she is domestic,” he continued, “but I love travelling, and my wife, consequently, should love travelling also.”  “Will you come away with me?” he said finally to her; but the Reed shook her head, she was so attached to her home.
“You have been trifling with me,” he cried.
“I am off to the Pyramids.
Good-bye!” and he flew away.
All day long he flew, and at night-time he arrived at the city.
“Where shall I put up?” he said; “I hope the town has made preparations.”  Then he saw the statue on the tall column.
“I will put up there,” he cried; “it is a fine position, with plenty of fresh air.”  So he alighted just between the feet of the Happy Prince.
“I have a golden bedroom,” he said softly to himself as he looked round, and he prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head under his wing a large drop of water fell on him.
“What a curious thing!” he cried; “there is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars are quite clear and bright, and yet it is raining.
The climate in the north of Europe is really dreadful.
The Reed used to like the rain, but that was merely her selfishness.”  Then another drop fell.
“What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain off?” he said; “I must look for a good chimney-pot,” and he determined to fly away.
But before he had opened his wings, a third drop fell, and he looked up, and saw—Ah! what did he see?
The eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears, and tears were running down his golden cheeks.
His face was so beautiful in the moonlight that the little Swallow was filled with pity.
“Who are you?” he said.
“I am the Happy Prince.”  “Why are you weeping then?” asked the Swallow; “you have quite drenched me.”  “When I was alive and had a human heart,” answered the statue, “I did not know what tears were, for I lived in the Palace of Sans-Souci, where sorrow is not allowed to enter.
In the daytime I played with my companions in the garden, and in the evening I led the dance in the Great Hall.
Round the garden ran a very lofty wall, but I never cared to ask what lay beyond it, everything about me was so beautiful.
My courtiers called me the Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was, if pleasure be happiness.
So I lived, and so I died.
And now that I am dead they have set me up here so high that I can see all the ugliness and all the misery of my city, and though my heart is made of lead yet I cannot chose but weep.”  “What! is he not solid gold?” said the Swallow to himself.
He was too polite to make any personal remarks out loud.
“Far away,” continued the statue in a low musical voice, “far away in a little street there is a poor house.
One of the windows is open, and through it I can see a woman seated at a table.
Her face is thin and worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the needle, for she is a seamstress.
She is embroidering passion-flowers on a satin gown for the loveliest of the Queen’s maids-of-honour to wear at the next Court-ball.
In a bed in the corner of the room her little boy is lying ill.
He has a fever, and is asking for oranges.
His mother has nothing to give him but river water, so he is crying.
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, will you not bring her the ruby out of my sword-hilt?
My feet are fastened to this pedestal and I cannot move.”  “I am waited for in Egypt,” said the Swallow.
“My friends are flying up and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotus-flowers.
Soon they will go to sleep in the tomb of the great King.
The King is there himself in his painted coffin.
He is wrapped in yellow linen, and embalmed with spices.
Round his neck is a chain of pale green jade, and his hands are like withered leaves.”  “Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay with me for one night, and be my messenger?
The boy is so thirsty, and the mother so sad.”  “I don’t think I like boys,” answered the Swallow.
“Last summer, when I was staying on the river, there were two rude boys, the miller’s sons, who were always throwing stones at me.
They never hit me, of course; we swallows fly far too well for that, and besides, I come of a family famous for its agility; but still, it was a mark of disrespect.”  But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little Swallow was sorry.
“It is very cold here,” he said; “but I will stay with you for one night, and be your messenger.”  “Thank you, little Swallow,” said the Prince.
So the Swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince’s sword, and flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.
He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels were sculptured.
He passed by the palace and heard the sound of dancing.
A beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover.
“How wonderful the stars are,” he said to her, “and how wonderful is the power of love!”  “I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State-ball,” she answered; “I have ordered passion-flowers to be embroidered on it; but the seamstresses are so lazy.”  He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging to the masts of the ships.
He passed over the Ghetto, and saw the old Jews bargaining with each other, and weighing out money in copper scales.
At last he came to the poor house and looked in.
The boy was tossing feverishly on his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired.
In he hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman’s thimble.
Then he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy’s forehead with his wings.
“How cool I feel,” said the boy, “I must be getting better”; and he sank into a delicious slumber.
Then the Swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him what he had done.
“It is curious,” he remarked, “but I feel quite warm now, although it is so cold.”  “That is because you have done a good action,” said the Prince.
And the little Swallow began to think, and then he fell asleep.
Thinking always made him sleepy.
When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath.
“What a remarkable phenomenon,” said the Professor of Ornithology as he was passing over the bridge.
“A swallow in winter!”  And he wrote a long letter about it to the local newspaper.
Every one quoted it, it was full of so many words that they could not understand.
“To-night I go to Egypt,” said the Swallow, and he was in high spirits at the prospect.
He visited all the public monuments, and sat a long time on top of the church steeple.
Wherever he went the Sparrows chirruped, and said to each other, “What a distinguished stranger!” so he enjoyed himself very much.
When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
“Have you any commissions for Egypt?” he cried; “I am just starting.”  “Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay with me one night longer?”  “I am waited for in Egypt,” answered the Swallow.
“To-morrow my friends will fly up to the Second Cataract.
The river-horse couches there among the bulrushes, and on a great granite throne sits the God Memnon.
All night long he watches the stars, and when the morning star shines he utters one cry of joy, and then he is silent.
At noon the yellow lions come down to the water’s edge to drink.
They have eyes like green beryls, and their roar is louder than the roar of the cataract.”  “Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “far away across the city I see a young man in a garret.
He is leaning over a desk covered with papers, and in a tumbler by his side there is a bunch of withered violets.
His hair is brown and crisp, and his lips are red as a pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes.
He is trying to finish a play for the Director of the Theatre, but he is too cold to write any more.
There is no fire in the grate, and hunger has made him faint.”  “I will wait with you one night longer,” said the Swallow, who really had a good heart.
“Shall I take him another ruby?”  “Alas!  I have no ruby now,” said the Prince; “my eyes are all that I have left.
They are made of rare sapphires, which were brought out of India a thousand years ago.
Pluck out one of them and take it to him.
He will sell it to the jeweller, and buy food and firewood, and finish his play.”  “Dear Prince,” said the Swallow, “I cannot do that”; and he began to weep.
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I command you.”  So the Swallow plucked out the Prince’s eye, and flew away to the student’s garret.
It was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in the roof.
Through this he darted, and came into the room.
The young man had his head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the bird’s wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful sapphire lying on the withered violets.
“I am beginning to be appreciated,” he cried; “this is from some great admirer.
Now I can finish my play,” and he looked quite happy.
The next day the Swallow flew down to the harbour.
He sat on the mast of a large vessel and watched the sailors hauling big chests out of the hold with ropes.
“Heave a-hoy!” they shouted as each chest came up.
“I am going to Egypt”! cried the Swallow, but nobody minded, and when the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
“I am come to bid you good-bye,” he cried.
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay with me one night longer?”  “It is winter,” answered the Swallow, “and the chill snow will soon be here.
In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm-trees, and the crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them.
My companions are building a nest in the Temple of Baalbec, and the pink and white doves are watching them, and cooing to each other.
Dear Prince, I must leave you, but I will never forget you, and next spring I will bring you back two beautiful jewels in place of those you have given away.
The ruby shall be redder than a red rose, and the sapphire shall be as blue as the great sea.”  “In the square below,” said the Happy Prince, “there stands a little match-girl.
She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and they are all spoiled.
Her father will beat her if she does not bring home some money, and she is crying.
She has no shoes or stockings, and her little head is bare.
Pluck out my other eye, and give it to her, and her father will not beat her.”  “I will stay with you one night longer,” said the Swallow, “but I cannot pluck out your eye.
You would be quite blind then.”  “Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I command you.”  So he plucked out the Prince’s other eye, and darted down with it.
He swooped past the match-girl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her hand.
“What a lovely bit of glass,” cried the little girl; and she ran home, laughing.
Then the Swallow came back to the Prince.
“You are blind now,” he said, “so I will stay with you always.”  “No, little Swallow,” said the poor Prince, “you must go away to Egypt.”  “I will stay with you always,” said the Swallow, and he slept at the Prince’s feet.
All the next day he sat on the Prince’s shoulder, and told him stories of what he had seen in strange lands.
He told him of the red ibises, who stand in long rows on the banks of the Nile, and catch gold-fish in their beaks; of the Sphinx, who is as old as the world itself, and lives in the desert, and knows everything; of the merchants, who walk slowly by the side of their camels, and carry amber beads in their hands; of the King of the Mountains of the Moon, who is as black as ebony, and worships a large crystal; of the great green snake that sleeps in a palm-tree, and has twenty priests to feed it with honey-cakes; and of the pygmies who sail over a big lake on large flat leaves, and are always at war with the butterflies.
“Dear little Swallow,” said the Prince, “you tell me of marvellous things, but more marvellous than anything is the suffering of men and of women.
There is no Mystery so great as Misery.
Fly over my city, little Swallow, and tell me what you see there.”  So the Swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making merry in their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at the gates.
He flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of starving children looking out listlessly at the black streets.
Under the archway of a bridge two little boys were lying in one another’s arms to try and keep themselves warm.
“How hungry we are!” they said.
“You must not lie here,” shouted the Watchman, and they wandered out into the rain.
Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.
“I am covered with fine gold,” said the Prince, “you must take it off, leaf by leaf, and give it to my poor; the living always think that gold can make them happy.”  Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the Swallow picked off, till the Happy Prince looked quite dull and grey.
Leaf after leaf of the fine gold he brought to the poor, and the children’s faces grew rosier, and they laughed and played games in the street.
“We have bread now!” they cried.
Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost.
The streets looked as if they were made of silver, they were so bright and glistening; long icicles like crystal daggers hung down from the eaves of the houses, everybody went about in furs, and the little boys wore scarlet caps and skated on the ice.
The poor little Swallow grew colder and colder, but he would not leave the Prince, he loved him too well.
He picked up crumbs outside the baker’s door when the baker was not looking and tried to keep himself warm by flapping his wings.
But at last he knew that he was going to die.
He had just strength to fly up to the Prince’s shoulder once more.
“Good-bye, dear Prince!” he murmured, “will you let me kiss your hand?”  “I am glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “you have stayed too long here; but you must kiss me on the lips, for I love you.”  “It is not to Egypt that I am going,” said the Swallow.
“I am going to the House of Death.
Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not?”  And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down dead at his feet.
At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as if something had broken.
The fact is that the leaden heart had snapped right in two.
It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.
Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square below in company with the Town Councillors.
As they passed the column he looked up at the statue: “Dear me! how shabby the Happy Prince looks!” he said.
“How shabby indeed!” cried the Town Councillors, who always agreed with the Mayor; and they went up to look at it.
“The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and he is golden no longer,” said the Mayor in fact, “he is litttle better than a beggar!”  “Little better than a beggar,” said the Town Councillors.
“And here is actually a dead bird at his feet!” continued the Mayor.
“We must really issue a proclamation that birds are not to be allowed to die here.”  And the Town Clerk made a note of the suggestion.
So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince.
“As he is no longer beautiful he is no longer useful,” said the Art Professor at the University.
Then they melted the statue in a furnace, and the Mayor held a meeting of the Corporation to decide what was to be done with the metal.
“We must have another statue, of course,” he said, “and it shall be a statue of myself.”  “Of myself,” said each of the Town Councillors, and they quarrelled.
When I last heard of them they were quarrelling still.
“What a strange thing!” said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry.
“This broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace.
We must throw it away.”  So they threw it on a dust-heap where the dead Swallow was also lying.
“Bring me the two most precious things in the city,” said God to one of His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden heart and the dead bird.
“You have rightly chosen,” said God, “for in my garden of Paradise this little bird shall sing for evermore, and in my city of gold the Happy Prince shall praise me.”    The Nightingale and the Rose.
“SHE said that she would dance with me if I brought her red roses,” cried the young Student; “but in all my garden there is no red rose.”  From her nest in the holm-oak tree the Nightingale heard him, and she looked out through the leaves, and wondered.
“No red rose in all my garden!” he cried, and his beautiful eyes filled with tears.
“Ah, on what little things does happiness depend!  I have read all that the wise men have written, and all the secrets of philosophy are mine, yet for want of a red rose is my life made wretched.”  “Here at last is a true lover,” said the Nightingale.
“Night after night have I sung of him, though I knew him not: night after night have I told his story to the stars, and now I see him.
His hair is dark as the hyacinth-blossom, and his lips are red as the rose of his desire; but passion has made his face like pale ivory, and sorrow has set her seal upon his brow.”  “The Prince gives a ball to-morrow night,” murmured the young Student, “and my love will be of the company.
If I bring her a red rose she will dance with me till dawn.
If I bring her a red rose, I shall hold her in my arms, and she will lean her head upon my shoulder, and her hand will be clasped in mine.
But there is no red rose in my garden, so I shall sit lonely, and she will pass me by.
She will have no heed of me, and my heart will break.”  “Here indeed is the true lover,” said the Nightingale.
“What I sing of, he suffers—what is joy to me, to him is pain.
Surely Love is a wonderful thing.
It is more precious than emeralds, and dearer than fine opals.
Pearls and pomegranates cannot buy it, nor is it set forth in the marketplace.
It may not be purchased of the merchants, nor can it be weighed out in the balance for gold.”  “The musicians will sit in their gallery,” said the young Student, “and play upon their stringed instruments, and my love will dance to the sound of the harp and the violin.
She will dance so lightly that her feet will not touch the floor, and the courtiers in their gay dresses will throng round her.
But with me she will not dance, for I have no red rose to give her”; and he flung himself down on the grass, and buried his face in his hands, and wept.
“Why is he weeping?” asked a little Green Lizard, as he ran past him with his tail in the air.
“Why, indeed?” said a Butterfly, who was fluttering about after a sunbeam.
“Why, indeed?” whispered a Daisy to his neighbour, in a soft, low voice.
“He is weeping for a red rose,” said the Nightingale.
“For a red rose?” they cried; “how very ridiculous!” and the little Lizard, who was something of a cynic, laughed outright.
But the Nightingale understood the secret of the Student’s sorrow, and she sat silent in the oak-tree, and thought about the mystery of Love.
Suddenly she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She passed through the grove like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed across the garden.
In the centre of the grass-plot was standing a beautiful Rose-tree, and when she saw it she flew over to it, and lit upon a spray.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”  But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are white,” it answered; “as white as the foam of the sea, and whiter than the snow upon the mountain.
But go to my brother who grows round the old sun-dial, and perhaps he will give you what you want.”  So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing round the old sun-dial.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”  But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are yellow,” it answered; “as yellow as the hair of the mermaiden who sits upon an amber throne, and yellower than the daffodil that blooms in the meadow before the mower comes with his scythe.
But go to my brother who grows beneath the Student’s window, and perhaps he will give you what you want.”  So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing beneath the Student’s window.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”  But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are red,” it answered, “as red as the feet of the dove, and redder than the great fans of coral that wave and wave in the ocean-cavern.
But the winter has chilled my veins, and the frost has nipped my buds, and the storm has broken my branches, and I shall have no roses at all this year.”  “One red rose is all I want,” cried the Nightingale, “only one red rose! Is there no way by which I can get it?”  “There is a way,” answered the Tree; “but it is so terrible that I dare not tell it to you.”  “Tell it to me,” said the Nightingale, “I am not afraid.”  “If you want a red rose,” said the Tree, “you must build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with your own heart’s-blood.
You must sing to me with your breast against a thorn.
All night long you must sing to me, and the thorn must pierce your heart, and your life-blood must flow into my veins, and become mine.”  “Death is a great price to pay for a red rose,” cried the Nightingale, “and Life is very dear to all.
It is pleasant to sit in the green wood, and to watch the Sun in his chariot of gold, and the Moon in her chariot of pearl.
Sweet is the scent of the hawthorn, and sweet are the bluebells that hide in the valley, and the heather that blows on the hill.
Yet Love is better than Life, and what is the heart of a bird compared to the heart of a man?”  So she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She swept over the garden like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed through the grove.
The young Student was still lying on the grass, where she had left him, and the tears were not yet dry in his beautiful eyes.
“Be happy,” cried the Nightingale, “be happy; you shall have your red rose.
I will build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with my own heart’s-blood.
All that I ask of you in return is that you will be a true lover, for Love is wiser than Philosophy, though she is wise, and mightier than Power, though he is mighty.
Flame-coloured are his wings, and coloured like flame is his body.
His lips are sweet as honey, and his breath is like frankincense.”  The Student looked up from the grass, and listened, but he could not understand what the Nightingale was saying to him, for he only knew the things that are written down in books.
But the Oak-tree understood, and felt sad, for he was very fond of the little Nightingale who had built her nest in his branches.
“Sing me one last song,” he whispered; “I shall feel very lonely when you are gone.”  So the Nightingale sang to the Oak-tree, and her voice was like water bubbling from a silver jar.
When she had finished her song the Student got up, and pulled a note-book and a lead-pencil out of his pocket.
“She has form,” he said to himself, as he walked away through the grove—“that cannot be denied to her; but has she got feeling?
I am afraid not.
In fact, she is like most artists; she is all style, without any sincerity.
She would not sacrifice herself for others.
She thinks merely of music, and everybody knows that the arts are selfish.
Still, it must be admitted that she has some beautiful notes in her voice.
What a pity it is that they do not mean anything, or do any practical good.” And he went into his room, and lay down on his little pallet-bed, and began to think of his love; and, after a time, he fell asleep.
And when the Moon shone in the heavens the Nightingale flew to the Rose-tree, and set her breast against the thorn.
All night long she sang with her breast against the thorn, and the cold crystal Moon leaned down and listened.
All night long she sang, and the thorn went deeper and deeper into her breast, and her life-blood ebbed away from her.
She sang first of the birth of love in the heart of a boy and a girl.
And on the top-most spray of the Rose-tree there blossomed a marvellous rose, petal following petal, as song followed song.
Pale was it, at first, as the mist that hangs over the river—pale as the feet of the morning, and silver as the wings of the dawn.
As the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, as the shadow of a rose in a water-pool, so was the rose that blossomed on the topmost spray of the Tree.
But the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come before the rose is finished.”  So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and louder and louder grew her song, for she sang of the birth of passion in the soul of a man and a maid.
And a delicate flush of pink came into the leaves of the rose, like the flush in the face of the bridegroom when he kisses the lips of the bride.
But the thorn had not yet reached her heart, so the rose’s heart remained white, for only a Nightingale’s heart’s-blood can crimson the heart of a rose.
And the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come before the rose is finished.”  So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and the thorn touched her heart, and a fierce pang of pain shot through her.
Bitter, bitter was the pain, and wilder and wilder grew her song, for she sang of the Love that is perfected by Death, of the Love that dies not in the tomb.
And the marvellous rose became crimson, like the rose of the eastern sky.
Crimson was the girdle of petals, and crimson as a ruby was the heart.
But the Nightingale’s voice grew fainter, and her little wings began to beat, and a film came over her eyes.
Fainter and fainter grew her song, and she felt something choking her in her throat.
Then she gave one last burst of music.
The white Moon heard it, and she forgot the dawn, and lingered on in the sky.
The red rose heard it, and it trembled all over with ecstasy, and opened its petals to the cold morning air.
Echo bore it to her purple cavern in the hills, and woke the sleeping shepherds from their dreams.
It floated through the reeds of the river, and they carried its message to the sea.
“Look, look!” cried the Tree, “the rose is finished now”; but the Nightingale made no answer, for she was lying dead in the long grass, with the thorn in her heart.
And at noon the Student opened his window and looked out.
“Why, what a wonderful piece of luck!” he cried; “here is a red rose!  I have never seen any rose like it in all my life.
It is so beautiful that I am sure it has a long Latin name”; and he leaned down and plucked it.
Then he put on his hat, and ran up to the Professor’s house with the rose in his hand.
The daughter of the Professor was sitting in the doorway winding blue silk on a reel, and her little dog was lying at her feet.
“You said that you would dance with me if I brought you a red rose,” cried the Student.
“Here is the reddest rose in all the world.
You will wear it to-night next your heart, and as we dance together it will tell you how I love you.”  But the girl frowned.
“I am afraid it will not go with my dress,” she answered; “and, besides, the Chamberlain’s nephew has sent me some real jewels, and everybody knows that jewels cost far more than flowers.”  “Well, upon my word, you are very ungrateful,” said the Student angrily; and he threw the rose into the street, where it fell into the gutter, and a cart-wheel went over it.
“Ungrateful!” said the girl.
“I tell you what, you are very rude; and, after all, who are you?
Only a Student.
Why, I don’t believe you have even got silver buckles to your shoes as the Chamberlain’s nephew has”; and she got up from her chair and went into the house.
“What a silly thing Love is,” said the Student as he walked away.
“It is not half as useful as Logic, for it does not prove anything, and it is always telling one of things that are not going to happen, and making one believe things that are not true.
In fact, it is quite unpractical, and, as in this age to be practical is everything, I shall go back to Philosophy and study Metaphysics.”  So he returned to his room and pulled out a great dusty book, and began to read.
The Selfish Giant.
EVERY afternoon, as they were coming from school, the children used to go and play in the Giant’s garden.
It was a large lovely garden, with soft green grass.
Here and there over the grass stood beautiful flowers like stars, and there were twelve peach-trees that in the spring-time broke out into delicate blossoms of pink and pearl, and in the autumn bore rich fruit.
The birds sat on the trees and sang so sweetly that the children used to stop their games in order to listen to them.
“How happy we are here!” they cried to each other.
One day the Giant came back.
He had been to visit his friend the Cornish ogre, and had stayed with him for seven years.
After the seven years were over he had said all that he had to say, for his conversation was limited, and he determined to return to his own castle.
When he arrived he saw the children playing in the garden.
“What are you doing here?” he cried in a very gruff voice, and the children ran away.
“My own garden is my own garden,” said the Giant; “any one can understand that, and I will allow nobody to play in it but myself.”  So he built a high wall all round it, and put up a notice-board.
TRESPASSERS              WILL BE             PROSECUTED  He was a very selfish Giant.
The poor children had now nowhere to play.
They tried to play on the road, but the road was very dusty and full of hard stones, and they did not like it.
They used to wander round the high wall when their lessons were over, and talk about the beautiful garden inside.
“How happy we were there,” they said to each other.
Then the Spring came, and all over the country there were little blossoms and little birds.
Only in the garden of the Selfish Giant it was still winter.
The birds did not care to sing in it as there were no children, and the trees forgot to blossom.
Once a beautiful flower put its head out from the grass, but when it saw the notice-board it was so sorry for the children that it slipped back into the ground again, and went off to sleep.
The only people who were pleased were the Snow and the Frost.
“Spring has forgotten this garden,” they cried, “so we will live here all the year round.”  The Snow covered up the grass with her great white cloak, and the Frost painted all the trees silver.
Then they invited the North Wind to stay with them, and he came.
He was wrapped in furs, and he roared all day about the garden, and blew the chimney-pots down.
“This is a delightful spot,” he said, “we must ask the Hail on a visit.” So the Hail came.
Every day for three hours he rattled on the roof of the castle till he broke most of the slates, and then he ran round and round the garden as fast as he could go.
He was dressed in grey, and his breath was like ice.
“I cannot understand why the Spring is so late in coming,” said the Selfish Giant, as he sat at the window and looked out at his cold white garden; “I hope there will be a change in the weather.”  But the Spring never came, nor the Summer.
The Autumn gave golden fruit to every garden, but to the Giant’s garden she gave none.
“He is too selfish,” she said.
So it was always Winter there, and the North Wind, and the Hail, and the Frost, and the Snow danced about through the trees.
One morning the Giant was lying awake in bed when he heard some lovely music.
It sounded so sweet to his ears that he thought it must be the King’s musicians passing by.
It was really only a little linnet singing outside his window, but it was so long since he had heard a bird sing in his garden that it seemed to him to be the most beautiful music in the world.
Then the Hail stopped dancing over his head, and the North Wind ceased roaring, and a delicious perfume came to him through the open casement.
“I believe the Spring has come at last,” said the Giant; and he jumped out of bed and looked out.
What did he see?
He saw a most wonderful sight.
Through a little hole in the wall the children had crept in, and they were sitting in the branches of the trees.
In every tree that he could see there was a little child.
And the trees were so glad to have the children back again that they had covered themselves with blossoms, and were waving their arms gently above the children’s heads.
The birds were flying about and twittering with delight, and the flowers were looking up through the green grass and laughing.
It was a lovely scene, only in one corner it was still winter.
It was the farthest corner of the garden, and in it was standing a little boy.
He was so small that he could not reach up to the branches of the tree, and he was wandering all round it, crying bitterly.
The poor tree was still quite covered with frost and snow, and the North Wind was blowing and roaring above it.
“Climb up! little boy,” said the Tree, and it bent its branches down as low as it could; but the boy was too tiny.
And the Giant’s heart melted as he looked out.
“How selfish I have been!” he said; “now I know why the Spring would not come here.
I will put that poor little boy on the top of the tree, and then I will knock down the wall, and my garden shall be the children’s playground for ever and ever.”  He was really very sorry for what he had done.
So he crept downstairs and opened the front door quite softly, and went out into the garden.
But when the children saw him they were so frightened that they all ran away, and the garden became winter again.
Only the little boy did not run, for his eyes were so full of tears that he did not see the Giant coming.
And the Giant stole up behind him and took him gently in his hand, and put him up into the tree.
And the tree broke at once into blossom, and the birds came and sang on it, and the little boy stretched out his two arms and flung them round the Giant’s neck, and kissed him.
And the other children, when they saw that the Giant was not wicked any longer, came running back, and with them came the Spring.
“It is your garden now, little children,” said the Giant, and he took a great axe and knocked down the wall.
And when the people were going to market at twelve o’clock they found the Giant playing with the children in the most beautiful garden they had ever seen.
All day long they played, and in the evening they came to the Giant to bid him good-bye.
“But where is your little companion?” he said: “the boy I put into the tree.”  The Giant loved him the best because he had kissed him.
“We don’t know,” answered the children; “he has gone away.”  “You must tell him to be sure and come here to-morrow,” said the Giant.
But the children said that they did not know where he lived, and had never seen him before; and the Giant felt very sad.
Every afternoon, when school was over, the children came and played with the Giant.
But the little boy whom the Giant loved was never seen again.
The Giant was very kind to all the children, yet he longed for his first little friend, and often spoke of him.
“How I would like to see him!” he used to say.
Years went over, and the Giant grew very old and feeble.
He could not play about any more, so he sat in a huge armchair, and watched the children at their games, and admired his garden.
“I have many beautiful flowers,” he said; “but the children are the most beautiful flowers of all.”  One winter morning he looked out of his window as he was dressing.
He did not hate the Winter now, for he knew that it was merely the Spring asleep, and that the flowers were resting.
Suddenly he rubbed his eyes in wonder, and looked and looked.
It certainly was a marvellous sight.
In the farthest corner of the garden was a tree quite covered with lovely white blossoms.
Its branches were all golden, and silver fruit hung down from them, and underneath it stood the little boy he had loved.
Downstairs ran the Giant in great joy, and out into the garden.
He hastened across the grass, and came near to the child.
And when he came quite close his face grew red with anger, and he said, “Who hath dared to wound thee?”  For on the palms of the child’s hands were the prints of two nails, and the prints of two nails were on the little feet.
“Who hath dared to wound thee?” cried the Giant; “tell me, that I may take my big sword and slay him.”  “Nay!” answered the child; “but these are the wounds of Love.”  “Who art thou?” said the Giant, and a strange awe fell on him, and he knelt before the little child.
And the child smiled on the Giant, and said to him, “You let me play once in your garden, to-day you shall come with me to my garden, which is Paradise.”  And when the children ran in that afternoon, they found the Giant lying dead under the tree, all covered with white blossoms.
The Devoted Friend.
ONE morning the old Water-rat put his head out of his hole.
He had bright beady eyes and stiff grey whiskers and his tail was like a long bit of black india-rubber.
The little ducks were swimming about in the pond, looking just like a lot of yellow canaries, and their mother, who was pure white with real red legs, was trying to teach them how to stand on their heads in the water.
“You will never be in the best society unless you can stand on your heads,” she kept saying to them; and every now and then she showed them how it was done.
But the little ducks paid no attention to her.
They were so young that they did not know what an advantage it is to be in society at all.
“What disobedient children!” cried the old Water-rat; “they really deserve to be drowned.”  “Nothing of the kind,” answered the Duck, “every one must make a beginning, and parents cannot be too patient.”  “Ah! I know nothing about the feelings of parents,” said the Water-rat; “I am not a family man.
In fact, I have never been married, and I never intend to be.
Love is all very well in its way, but friendship is much higher.
Indeed, I know of nothing in the world that is either nobler or rarer than a devoted friendship.”  “And what, pray, is your idea of the duties of a devoted friend?” asked a Green Linnet, who was sitting in a willow-tree hard by, and had overheard the conversation.
“Yes, that is just what I want to know,” said the Duck; and she swam away to the end of the pond, and stood upon her head, in order to give her children a good example.
“What a silly question!” cried the Water-rat.
“I should expect my devoted friend to be devoted to me, of course.”  “And what would you do in return?” said the little bird, swinging upon a silver spray, and flapping his tiny wings.
“I don’t understand you,” answered the Water-rat.
“Let me tell you a story on the subject,” said the Linnet.
“Is the story about me?” asked the Water-rat.
“If so, I will listen to it, for I am extremely fond of fiction.”  “It is applicable to you,” answered the Linnet; and he flew down, and alighting upon the bank, he told the story of The Devoted Friend.
“Once upon a time,” said the Linnet, “there was an honest little fellow named Hans.”  “Was he very distinguished?” asked the Water-rat.
“No,” answered the Linnet, “I don’t think he was distinguished at all, except for his kind heart, and his funny round good-humoured face.
He lived in a tiny cottage all by himself, and every day he worked in his garden.
In all the country-side there was no garden so lovely as his.
Sweet-william grew there, and Gilly-flowers, and Shepherds’-purses, and Fair-maids of France.
There were damask Roses, and yellow Roses, lilac Crocuses, and gold, purple Violets and white.
Columbine and Ladysmock, Marjoram and Wild Basil, the Cowslip and the Flower-de-luce, the Daffodil and the Clove-Pink bloomed or blossomed in their proper order as the months went by, one flower taking another flower’s place, so that there were always beautiful things to look at, and pleasant odours to smell.
“Little Hans had a great many friends, but the most devoted friend of all was big Hugh the Miller.
Indeed, so devoted was the rich Miller to little Hans, that he would never go by his garden without leaning over the wall and plucking a large nosegay, or a handful of sweet herbs, or filling his pockets with plums and cherries if it was the fruit season.
“‘Real friends should have everything in common,’ the Miller used to say, and little Hans nodded and smiled, and felt very proud of having a friend with such noble ideas.
“Sometimes, indeed, the neighbours thought it strange that the rich Miller never gave little Hans anything in return, though he had a hundred sacks of flour stored away in his mill, and six milch cows, and a large flock of woolly sheep; but Hans never troubled his head about these things, and nothing gave him greater pleasure than to listen to all the wonderful things the Miller used to say about the unselfishness of true friendship.
“So little Hans worked away in his garden.
During the spring, the summer, and the autumn he was very happy, but when the winter came, and he had no fruit or flowers to bring to the market, he suffered a good deal from cold and hunger, and often had to go to bed without any supper but a few dried pears or some hard nuts.
In the winter, also, he was extremely lonely, as the Miller never came to see him then.
“‘There is no good in my going to see little Hans as long as the snow lasts,’ the Miller used to say to his wife, ‘for when people are in trouble they should be left alone, and not be bothered by visitors.
That at least is my idea about friendship, and I am sure I am right.
So I shall wait till the spring comes, and then I shall pay him a visit, and he will be able to give me a large basket of primroses and that will make him so happy.’  “‘You are certainly very thoughtful about others,’ answered the Wife, as she sat in her comfortable armchair by the big pinewood fire; ‘very thoughtful indeed.
It is quite a treat to hear you talk about friendship.
I am sure the clergyman himself could not say such beautiful things as you do, though he does live in a three-storied house, and wear a gold ring on his little finger.’  “‘But could we not ask little Hans up here?’ said the Miller’s youngest son.
‘If poor Hans is in trouble I will give him half my porridge, and show him my white rabbits.’  “‘What a silly boy you are!’ cried the Miller; ‘I really don’t know what is the use of sending you to school.
You seem not to learn anything.
Why, if little Hans came up here, and saw our warm fire, and our good supper, and our great cask of red wine, he might get envious, and envy is a most terrible thing, and would spoil anybody’s nature.
I certainly will not allow Hans’ nature to be spoiled.
I am his best friend, and I will always watch over him, and see that he is not led into any temptations.
Besides, if Hans came here, he might ask me to let him have some flour on credit, and that I could not do.
Flour is one thing, and friendship is another, and they should not be confused.
Why, the words are spelt differently, and mean quite different things.
Everybody can see that.’  “‘How well you talk!’ said the Miller’s Wife, pouring herself out a large glass of warm ale; ‘really I feel quite drowsy.
It is just like being in church.’  “‘Lots of people act well,’ answered the Miller; ‘but very few people talk well, which shows that talking is much the more difficult thing of the two, and much the finer thing also’; and he looked sternly across the table at his little son, who felt so ashamed of himself that he hung his head down, and grew quite scarlet, and began to cry into his tea.
However, he was so young that you must excuse him.”  “Is that the end of the story?” asked the Water-rat.
“Certainly not,” answered the Linnet, “that is the beginning.”  “Then you are quite behind the age,” said the Water-rat.
“Every good story-teller nowadays starts with the end, and then goes on to the beginning, and concludes with the middle.
That is the new method.
I heard all about it the other day from a critic who was walking round the pond with a young man.
He spoke of the matter at great length, and I am sure he must have been right, for he had blue spectacles and a bald head, and whenever the young man made any remark, he always answered ‘Pooh!’ But pray go on with your story.
I like the Miller immensely.
I have all kinds of beautiful sentiments myself, so there is a great sympathy between us.”  “Well,” said the Linnet, hopping now on one leg and now on the other, “as soon as the winter was over, and the primroses began to open their pale yellow stars, the Miller said to his wife that he would go down and see little Hans.
“‘Why, what a good heart you have!’ cried his Wife; ‘you are always thinking of others.
And mind you take the big basket with you for the flowers.’  “So the Miller tied the sails of the windmill together with a strong iron chain, and went down the hill with the basket on his arm.
“‘Good morning, little Hans,’ said the Miller.
“‘Good morning,’ said Hans, leaning on his spade, and smiling from ear to ear.
“‘And how have you been all the winter?’ said the Miller.
“‘Well, really,’ cried Hans, ‘it is very good of you to ask, very good indeed.
I am afraid I had rather a hard time of it, but now the spring has come, and I am quite happy, and all my flowers are doing well.’  “‘We often talked of you during the winter, Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘and wondered how you were getting on.’  “‘That was kind of you,’ said Hans; ‘I was half afraid you had forgotten me.’  “‘Hans, I am surprised at you,’ said the Miller; ‘friendship never forgets.
That is the wonderful thing about it, but I am afraid you don’t understand the poetry of life.
How lovely your primroses are looking, by-the-bye!”  “‘They are certainly very lovely,’ said Hans, ‘and it is a most lucky thing for me that I have so many.
I am going to bring them into the market and sell them to the Burgomaster’s daughter, and buy back my wheelbarrow with the money.’  “‘Buy back your wheelbarrow?
You don’t mean to say you have sold it?
What a very stupid thing to do!’  “‘Well, the fact is,’ said Hans, ‘that I was obliged to.
You see the winter was a very bad time for me, and I really had no money at all to buy bread with.
So I first sold the silver buttons off my Sunday coat, and then I sold my silver chain, and then I sold my big pipe, and at last I sold my wheelbarrow.
But I am going to buy them all back again now.’  “‘Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘I will give you my wheelbarrow.
It is not in very good repair; indeed, one side is gone, and there is something wrong with the wheel-spokes; but in spite of that I will give it to you.
I know it is very generous of me, and a great many people would think me extremely foolish for parting with it, but I am not like the rest of the world.
I think that generosity is the essence of friendship, and, besides, I have got a new wheelbarrow for myself.
Yes, you may set your mind at ease, I will give you my wheelbarrow.’  “‘Well, really, that is generous of you,’ said little Hans, and his funny round face glowed all over with pleasure.
‘I can easily put it in repair, as I have a plank of wood in the house.’  “‘A plank of wood!’ said the Miller; ‘why, that is just what I want for the roof of my barn.
There is a very large hole in it, and the corn will all get damp if I don’t stop it up.
How lucky you mentioned it!  It is quite remarkable how one good action always breeds another.
I have given you my wheelbarrow, and now you are going to give me your plank.
Of course, the wheelbarrow is worth far more than the plank, but true, friendship never notices things like that.
Pray get it at once, and I will set to work at my barn this very day.’  “‘Certainly,’ cried little Hans, and he ran into the shed and dragged the plank out.
“‘It is not a very big plank,’ said the Miller, looking at it, ‘and I am afraid that after I have mended my barn-roof there won’t be any left for you to mend the wheelbarrow with; but, of course, that is not my fault.
And now, as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I am sure you would like to give me some flowers in return.
Here is the basket, and mind you fill it quite full.’  “‘Quite full?’ said little Hans, rather sorrowfully, for it was really a very big basket, and he knew that if he filled it he would have no flowers left for the market and he was very anxious to get his silver buttons back.
“‘Well, really,’ answered the Miller, ‘as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I don’t think that it is much to ask you for a few flowers.
I may be wrong, but I should have thought that friendship, true friendship, was quite free from selfishness of any kind.’  “‘My dear friend, my best friend,’ cried little Hans, ‘you are welcome to all the flowers in my garden.
I would much sooner have your good opinion than my silver buttons, any day’; and he ran and plucked all his pretty primroses, and filled the Miller’s basket.
“‘Good-bye, little Hans,’ said the Miller, as he went up the hill with the plank on his shoulder, and the big basket in his hand.
“‘Good-bye,’ said little Hans, and he began to dig away quite merrily, he was so pleased about the wheelbarrow.
“The next day he was nailing up some honeysuckle against the porch, when he heard the Miller’s voice calling to him from the road.
So he jumped off the ladder, and ran down the garden, and looked over the wall.
“There was the Miller with a large sack of flour on his back.
“‘Dear little Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘would you mind carrying this sack of flour for me to market?’  “‘Oh, I am so sorry,’ said Hans, ‘but I am really very busy to-day.
I have got all my creepers to nail up, and all my flowers to water, and all my grass to roll.’  “‘Well, really,’ said the Miller, ‘I think that, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, it is rather unfriendly of you to refuse.’  “‘Oh, don’t say that,’ cried little Hans, ‘I wouldn’t be unfriendly for the whole world’; and he ran in for his cap, and trudged off with the big sack on his shoulders.
“It was a very hot day, and the road was terribly dusty, and before Hans had reached the sixth milestone he was so tired that he had to sit down and rest.
However, he went on bravely, and as last he reached the market.
After he had waited there some time, he sold the sack of flour for a very good price, and then he returned home at once, for he was afraid that if he stopped too late he might meet some robbers on the way.
“‘It has certainly been a hard day,’ said little Hans to himself as he was going to bed, ‘but I am glad I did not refuse the Miller, for he is my best friend, and, besides, he is going to give me his wheelbarrow.’  “Early the next morning the Miller came down to get the money for his sack of flour, but little Hans was so tired that he was still in bed.
“‘Upon my word,’ said the Miller, ‘you are very lazy.
Really, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, I think you might work harder.
Idleness is a great sin, and I certainly don’t like any of my friends to be idle or sluggish.
You must not mind my speaking quite plainly to you.
Of course I should not dream of doing so if I were not your friend.
But what is the good of friendship if one cannot say exactly what one means?
Anybody can say charming things and try to please and to flatter, but a true friend always says unpleasant things, and does not mind giving pain.
Indeed, if he is a really true friend he prefers it, for he knows that then he is doing good.’  “‘I am very sorry,’ said little Hans, rubbing his eyes and pulling off his night-cap, ‘but I was so tired that I thought I would lie in bed for a little time, and listen to the birds singing.
Do you know that I always work better after hearing the birds sing?’  “‘Well, I am glad of that,’ said the Miller, clapping little Hans on the back, ‘for I want you to come up to the mill as soon as you are dressed, and mend my barn-roof for me.’  “Poor little Hans was very anxious to go and work in his garden, for his flowers had not been watered for two days, but he did not like to refuse the Miller, as he was such a good friend to him.
“‘Do you think it would be unfriendly of me if I said I was busy?’ he inquired in a shy and timid voice.
“‘Well, really,’ answered the Miller, ‘I do not think it is much to ask of you, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow; but of course if you refuse I will go and do it myself.’  “‘Oh! on no account,’ cried little Hans and he jumped out of bed, and dressed himself, and went up to the barn.
“He worked there all day long, till sunset, and at sunset the Miller came to see how he was getting on.
“‘Have you mended the hole in the roof yet, little Hans?’ cried the Miller in a cheery voice.
“‘It is quite mended,’ answered little Hans, coming down the ladder.
“‘Ah!’ said the Miller, ‘there is no work so delightful as the work one does for others.’  “‘It is certainly a great privilege to hear you talk,’ answered little Hans, sitting down, and wiping his forehead, ‘a very great privilege.
But I am afraid I shall never have such beautiful ideas as you have.’  “‘Oh! they will come to you,’ said the Miller, ‘but you must take more pains.
At present you have only the practice of friendship; some day you will have the theory also.’  “‘Do you really think I shall?’ asked little Hans.
“‘I have no doubt of it,’ answered the Miller, ‘but now that you have mended the roof, you had better go home and rest, for I want you to drive my sheep to the mountain to-morrow.’  “Poor little Hans was afraid to say anything to this, and early the next morning the Miller brought his sheep round to the cottage, and Hans started off with them to the mountain.
It took him the whole day to get there and back; and when he returned he was so tired that he went off to sleep in his chair, and did not wake up till it was broad daylight.
“‘What a delightful time I shall have in my garden,’ he said, and he went to work at once.
“But somehow he was never able to look after his flowers at all, for his friend the Miller was always coming round and sending him off on long errands, or getting him to help at the mill.
Little Hans was very much distressed at times, as he was afraid his flowers would think he had forgotten them, but he consoled himself by the reflection that the Miller was his best friend.
‘Besides,’ he used to say, ‘he is going to give me his wheelbarrow, and that is an act of pure generosity.’  “So little Hans worked away for the Miller, and the Miller said all kinds of beautiful things about friendship, which Hans took down in a note-book, and used to read over at night, for he was a very good scholar.
“Now it happened that one evening little Hans was sitting by his fireside when a loud rap came at the door.
It was a very wild night, and the wind was blowing and roaring round the house so terribly that at first he thought it was merely the storm.
But a second rap came, and then a third, louder than any of the others.
“‘It is some poor traveller,’ said little Hans to himself, and he ran to the door.
“There stood the Miller with a lantern in one hand and a big stick in the other.
“‘Dear little Hans,’ cried the Miller, ‘I am in great trouble.
My little boy has fallen off a ladder and hurt himself, and I am going for the Doctor.
But he lives so far away, and it is such a bad night, that it has just occurred to me that it would be much better if you went instead of me.
You know I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, and so, it is only fair that you should do something for me in return.’  “‘Certainly,’ cried little Hans, ‘I take it quite as a compliment your coming to me, and I will start off at once.
But you must lend me your lantern, as the night is so dark that I am afraid I might fall into the ditch.’  “‘I am very sorry,’ answered the Miller, ‘but it is my new lantern, and it would be a great loss to me if anything happened to it.’  “‘Well, never mind, I will do without it,’ cried little Hans, and he took down his great fur coat, and his warm scarlet cap, and tied a muffler round his throat, and started off.
“What a dreadful storm it was!  The night was so black that little Hans could hardly see, and the wind was so strong that he could scarcely stand.
However, he was very courageous, and after he had been walking about three hours, he arrived at the Doctor’s house, and knocked at the door.
“‘Who is there?’ cried the Doctor, putting his head out of his bedroom window.
“‘Little Hans, Doctor.’  “’What do you want, little Hans?’  “‘The Miller’s son has fallen from a ladder, and has hurt himself, and the Miller wants you to come at once.’  “‘All right!’ said the Doctor; and he ordered his horse, and his big boots, and his lantern, and came downstairs, and rode off in the direction of the Miller’s house, little Hans trudging behind him.
“But the storm grew worse and worse, and the rain fell in torrents, and little Hans could not see where he was going, or keep up with the horse.
At last he lost his way, and wandered off on the moor, which was a very dangerous place, as it was full of deep holes, and there poor little Hans was drowned.
His body was found the next day by some goatherds, floating in a great pool of water, and was brought back by them to the cottage.
“Everybody went to little Hans’ funeral, as he was so popular, and the Miller was the chief mourner.
“‘As I was his best friend,’ said the Miller, ‘it is only fair that I should have the best place’; so he walked at the head of the procession in a long black cloak, and every now and then he wiped his eyes with a big pocket-handkerchief.
“‘Little Hans is certainly a great loss to every one,’ said the Blacksmith, when the funeral was over, and they were all seated comfortably in the inn, drinking spiced wine and eating sweet cakes.
“‘A great loss to me at any rate,’ answered the Miller; ‘why, I had as good as given him my wheelbarrow, and now I really don’t know what to do with it.
It is very much in my way at home, and it is in such bad repair that I could not get anything for it if I sold it.
I will certainly take care not to give away anything again.
One always suffers for being generous.’”  “Well?” said the Water-rat, after a long pause.
“Well, that is the end,” said the Linnet.
“But what became of the Miller?” asked the Water-rat.
“Oh!  I really don’t know,” replied the Linnet; “and I am sure that I don’t care.”  “It is quite evident then that you have no sympathy in your nature,” said the Water-rat.
“I am afraid you don’t quite see the moral of the story,” remarked the Linnet.
“The what?” screamed the Water-rat.
“The moral.”  “Do you mean to say that the story has a moral?”  “Certainly,” said the Linnet.
“Well, really,” said the Water-rat, in a very angry manner, “I think you should have told me that before you began.
If you had done so, I certainly would not have listened to you; in fact, I should have said ‘Pooh,’ like the critic.
However, I can say it now”; so he shouted out “Pooh” at the top of his voice, gave a whisk with his tail, and went back into his hole.
“And how do you like the Water-rat?” asked the Duck, who came paddling up some minutes afterwards.
“He has a great many good points, but for my own part I have a mother’s feelings, and I can never look at a confirmed bachelor without the tears coming into my eyes.”  “I am rather afraid that I have annoyed him,” answered the Linnet.
“The fact is, that I told him a story with a moral.”  “Ah! that is always a very dangerous thing to do,” said the Duck.
And I quite agree with her.
The Remarkable Rocket.
THE King’s son was going to be married, so there were general rejoicings.
He had waited a whole year for his bride, and at last she had arrived.
She was a Russian Princess, and had driven all the way from Finland in a sledge drawn by six reindeer.
The sledge was shaped like a great golden swan, and between the swan’s wings lay the little Princess herself.
Her long ermine-cloak reached right down to her feet, on her head was a tiny cap of silver tissue, and she was as pale as the Snow Palace in which she had always lived.
So pale was she that as she drove through the streets all the people wondered.
“She is like a white rose!” they cried, and they threw down flowers on her from the balconies.
At the gate of the Castle the Prince was waiting to receive her.
He had dreamy violet eyes, and his hair was like fine gold.
When he saw her he sank upon one knee, and kissed her hand.
“Your picture was beautiful,” he murmured, “but you are more beautiful than your picture”; and the little Princess blushed.
“She was like a white rose before,” said a young Page to his neighbour, “but she is like a red rose now”; and the whole Court was delighted.
For the next three days everybody went about saying, “White rose, Red rose, Red rose, White rose”; and the King gave orders that the Page’s salary was to be doubled.
As he received no salary at all this was not of much use to him, but it was considered a great honour, and was duly published in the Court Gazette.
When the three days were over the marriage was celebrated.
It was a magnificent ceremony, and the bride and bridegroom walked hand in hand under a canopy of purple velvet embroidered with little pearls.
Then there was a State Banquet, which lasted for five hours.
The Prince and Princess sat at the top of the Great Hall and drank out of a cup of clear crystal.
Only true lovers could drink out of this cup, for if false lips touched it, it grew grey and dull and cloudy.
“It’s quite clear that they love each other,” said the little Page, “as clear as crystal!” and the King doubled his salary a second time.
“What an honour!” cried all the courtiers.
After the banquet there was to be a Ball.
The bride and bridegroom were to dance the Rose-dance together, and the King had promised to play the flute.
He played very badly, but no one had ever dared to tell him so, because he was the King.
Indeed, he knew only two airs, and was never quite certain which one he was playing; but it made no matter, for, whatever he did, everybody cried out, “Charming! charming!”  The last item on the programme was a grand display of fireworks, to be let off exactly at midnight.
The little Princess had never seen a firework in her life, so the King had given orders that the Royal Pyrotechnist should be in attendance on the day of her marriage.
“What are fireworks like?” she had asked the Prince, one morning, as she was walking on the terrace.
“They are like the Aurora Borealis,” said the King, who always answered questions that were addressed to other people, “only much more natural.
I prefer them to stars myself, as you always know when they are going to appear, and they are as delightful as my own flute-playing.
You must certainly see them.”  So at the end of the King’s garden a great stand had been set up, and as soon as the Royal Pyrotechnist had put everything in its proper place, the fireworks began to talk to each other.
“The world is certainly very beautiful,” cried a little Squib.
“Just look at those yellow tulips.
Why! if they were real crackers they could not be lovelier.
I am very glad I have travelled.
Travel improves the mind wonderfully, and does away with all one’s prejudices.”  “The King’s garden is not the world, you foolish squib,” said a big Roman Candle; “the world is an enormous place, and it would take you three days to see it thoroughly.”  “Any place you love is the world to you,” exclaimed a pensive Catherine Wheel, who had been attached to an old deal box in early life, and prided herself on her broken heart; “but love is not fashionable any more, the poets have killed it.
They wrote so much about it that nobody believed them, and I am not surprised.
True love suffers, and is silent.
I remember myself once—But it is no matter now.
Romance is a thing of the past.”  “Nonsense!” said the Roman Candle, “Romance never dies.
It is like the moon, and lives for ever.
The bride and bridegroom, for instance, love each other very dearly.
I heard all about them this morning from a brown-paper cartridge, who happened to be staying in the same drawer as myself, and knew the latest Court news.”  But the Catherine Wheel shook her head.
“Romance is dead, Romance is dead, Romance is dead,” she murmured.
She was one of those people who think that, if you say the same thing over and over a great many times, it becomes true in the end.
Suddenly, a sharp, dry cough was heard, and they all looked round.
It came from a tall, supercilious-looking Rocket, who was tied to the end of a long stick.
He always coughed before he made any observation, so as to attract attention.
“Ahem! ahem!” he said, and everybody listened except the poor Catherine Wheel, who was still shaking her head, and murmuring, “Romance is dead.”  “Order! order!” cried out a Cracker.
He was something of a politician, and had always taken a prominent part in the local elections, so he knew the proper Parliamentary expressions to use.
“Quite dead,” whispered the Catherine Wheel, and she went off to sleep.
As soon as there was perfect silence, the Rocket coughed a third time and began.
He spoke with a very slow, distinct voice, as if he was dictating his memoirs, and always looked over the shoulder of the person to whom he was talking.
In fact, he had a most distinguished manner.
“How fortunate it is for the King’s son,” he remarked, “that he is to be married on the very day on which I am to be let off.
Really, if it had been arranged beforehand, it could not have turned out better for him; but, Princes are always lucky.”  “Dear me!” said the little Squib, “I thought it was quite the other way, and that we were to be let off in the Prince’s honour.”  “It may be so with you,” he answered; “indeed, I have no doubt that it is, but with me it is different.
I am a very remarkable Rocket, and come of remarkable parents.
My mother was the most celebrated Catherine Wheel of her day, and was renowned for her graceful dancing.
When she made her great public appearance she spun round nineteen times before she went out, and each time that she did so she threw into the air seven pink stars.
She was three feet and a half in diameter, and made of the very best gunpowder.
My father was a Rocket like myself, and of French extraction.
He flew so high that the people were afraid that he would never come down again.
He did, though, for he was of a kindly disposition, and he made a most brilliant descent in a shower of golden rain.
The newspapers wrote about his performance in very flattering terms.
Indeed, the Court Gazette called him a triumph of Pylotechnic art.”  “Pyrotechnic, Pyrotechnic, you mean,” said a Bengal Light; “I know it is Pyrotechnic, for I saw it written on my own canister.”  “Well, I said Pylotechnic,” answered the Rocket, in a severe tone of voice, and the Bengal Light felt so crushed that he began at once to bully the little squibs, in order to show that he was still a person of some importance.
“I was saying,” continued the Rocket, “I was saying—What was I saying?”  “You were talking about yourself,” replied the Roman Candle.
“Of course; I knew I was discussing some interesting subject when I was so rudely interrupted.
I hate rudeness and bad manners of every kind, for I am extremely sensitive.
No one in the whole world is so sensitive as I am, I am quite sure of that.”  “What is a sensitive person?” said the Cracker to the Roman Candle.
“A person who, because he has corns himself, always treads on other people’s toes,” answered the Roman Candle in a low whisper; and the Cracker nearly exploded with laughter.
“Pray, what are you laughing at?” inquired the Rocket; “I am not laughing.”  “I am laughing because I am happy,” replied the Cracker.
“That is a very selfish reason,” said the Rocket angrily.
“What right have you to be happy?
You should be thinking about others.
In fact, you should be thinking about me.
I am always thinking about myself, and I expect everybody else to do the same.
That is what is called sympathy.
It is a beautiful virtue, and I possess it in a high degree.
Suppose, for instance, anything happened to me to-night, what a misfortune that would be for every one!  The Prince and Princess would never be happy again, their whole married life would be spoiled; and as for the King, I know he would not get over it.
Really, when I begin to reflect on the importance of my position, I am almost moved to tears.”  “If you want to give pleasure to others,” cried the Roman Candle, “you had better keep yourself dry.”  “Certainly,” exclaimed the Bengal Light, who was now in better spirits; “that is only common sense.”  “Common sense, indeed!” said the Rocket indignantly; “you forget that I am very uncommon, and very remarkable.
Why, anybody can have common sense, provided that they have no imagination.
But I have imagination, for I never think of things as they really are; I always think of them as being quite different.
As for keeping myself dry, there is evidently no one here who can at all appreciate an emotional nature.
Fortunately for myself, I don’t care.
The only thing that sustains one through life is the consciousness of the immense inferiority of everybody else, and this is a feeling that I have always cultivated.
But none of you have any hearts.
Here you are laughing and making merry just as if the Prince and Princess had not just been married.”  “Well, really,” exclaimed a small Fire-balloon, “why not?
It is a most joyful occasion, and when I soar up into the air I intend to tell the stars all about it.
You will see them twinkle when I talk to them about the pretty bride.”  “Ah! what a trivial view of life!” said the Rocket; “but it is only what I expected.
There is nothing in you; you are hollow and empty.
Why, perhaps the Prince and Princess may go to live in a country where there is a deep river, and perhaps they may have one only son, a little fair-haired boy with violet eyes like the Prince himself; and perhaps some day he may go out to walk with his nurse; and perhaps the nurse may go to sleep under a great elder-tree; and perhaps the little boy may fall into the deep river and be drowned.
What a terrible misfortune!  Poor people, to lose their only son!  It is really too dreadful!  I shall never get over it.”  “But they have not lost their only son,” said the Roman Candle; “no misfortune has happened to them at all.”  “I never said that they had,” replied the Rocket; “I said that they might.
If they had lost their only son there would be no use in saying anything more about the matter.
I hate people who cry over spilt milk.
But when I think that they might lose their only son, I certainly am very much affected.”  “You certainly are!” cried the Bengal Light.
“In fact, you are the most affected person I ever met.”  “You are the rudest person I ever met,” said the Rocket, “and you cannot understand my friendship for the Prince.”  “Why, you don’t even know him,” growled the Roman Candle.
“I never said I knew him,” answered the Rocket.
“I dare say that if I knew him I should not be his friend at all.
It is a very dangerous thing to know one’s friends.”  “You had really better keep yourself dry,” said the Fire-balloon.
“That is the important thing.”  “Very important for you, I have no doubt,” answered the Rocket, “but I shall weep if I choose”; and he actually burst into real tears, which flowed down his stick like rain-drops, and nearly drowned two little beetles, who were just thinking of setting up house together, and were looking for a nice dry spot to live in.
“He must have a truly romantic nature,” said the Catherine Wheel, “for he weeps when there is nothing at all to weep about”; and she heaved a deep sigh, and thought about the deal box.
But the Roman Candle and the Bengal Light were quite indignant, and kept saying, “Humbug! humbug!” at the top of their voices.
They were extremely practical, and whenever they objected to anything they called it humbug.
Then the moon rose like a wonderful silver shield; and the stars began to shine, and a sound of music came from the palace.
The Prince and Princess were leading the dance.
They danced so beautifully that the tall white lilies peeped in at the window and watched them, and the great red poppies nodded their heads and beat time.
Then ten o’clock struck, and then eleven, and then twelve, and at the last stroke of midnight every one came out on the terrace, and the King sent for the Royal Pyrotechnist.
“Let the fireworks begin,” said the King; and the Royal Pyrotechnist made a low bow, and marched down to the end of the garden.
He had six attendants with him, each of whom carried a lighted torch at the end of a long pole.
It was certainly a magnificent display.
Whizz! Whizz! went the Catherine Wheel, as she spun round and round.
Boom!  Boom! went the Roman Candle.
Then the Squibs danced all over the place, and the Bengal Lights made everything look scarlet.
“Good-bye,” cried the Fire-balloon, as he soared away, dropping tiny blue sparks.
Bang! Bang! answered the Crackers, who were enjoying themselves immensely.
Every one was a great success except the Remarkable Rocket.
He was so damp with crying that he could not go off at all.
The best thing in him was the gunpowder, and that was so wet with tears that it was of no use.
All his poor relations, to whom he would never speak, except with a sneer, shot up into the sky like wonderful golden flowers with blossoms of fire.
Huzza! Huzza! cried the Court; and the little Princess laughed with pleasure.
“I suppose they are reserving me for some grand occasion,” said the Rocket; “no doubt that is what it means,” and he looked more supercilious than ever.
The next day the workmen came to put everything tidy.
“This is evidently a deputation,” said the Rocket; “I will receive them with becoming dignity” so he put his nose in the air, and began to frown severely as if he were thinking about some very important subject.
But they took no notice of him at all till they were just going away.
Then one of them caught sight of him.
“Hallo!” he cried, “what a bad rocket!” and he threw him over the wall into the ditch.
“BAD Rocket?
BAD Rocket?” he said, as he whirled through the air; “impossible!  GRAND Rocket, that is what the man said.
BAD and GRAND sound very much the same, indeed they often are the same”; and he fell into the mud.
“It is not comfortable here,” he remarked, “but no doubt it is some fashionable watering-place, and they have sent me away to recruit my health.
My nerves are certainly very much shattered, and I require rest.”  Then a little Frog, with bright jewelled eyes, and a green mottled coat, swam up to him.
“A new arrival, I see!” said the Frog.
“Well, after all there is nothing like mud.
Give me rainy weather and a ditch, and I am quite happy.
Do you think it will be a wet afternoon?
I am sure I hope so, but the sky is quite blue and cloudless.
What a pity!”  “Ahem! ahem!” said the Rocket, and he began to cough.
“What a delightful voice you have!” cried the Frog.
“Really it is quite like a croak, and croaking is of course the most musical sound in the world.
You will hear our glee-club this evening.
We sit in the old duck pond close by the farmer’s house, and as soon as the moon rises we begin.
It is so entrancing that everybody lies awake to listen to us.
In fact, it was only yesterday that I heard the farmer’s wife say to her mother that she could not get a wink of sleep at night on account of us.
It is most gratifying to find oneself so popular.”  “Ahem! ahem!” said the Rocket angrily.
He was very much annoyed that he could not get a word in.
“A delightful voice, certainly,” continued the Frog; “I hope you will come over to the duck-pond.
I am off to look for my daughters.
I have six beautiful daughters, and I am so afraid the Pike may meet them.
He is a perfect monster, and would have no hesitation in breakfasting off them.
Well, good-bye: I have enjoyed our conversation very much, I assure you.”  “Conversation, indeed!” said the Rocket.
“You have talked the whole time yourself.
That is not conversation.”  “Somebody must listen,” answered the Frog, “and I like to do all the talking myself.
It saves time, and prevents arguments.”  “But I like arguments,” said the Rocket.
“I hope not,” said the Frog complacently.
“Arguments are extremely vulgar, for everybody in good society holds exactly the same opinions.
Good-bye a second time; I see my daughters in the distance and the little Frog swam away.
“You are a very irritating person,” said the Rocket, “and very ill-bred.
I hate people who talk about themselves, as you do, when one wants to talk about oneself, as I do.
It is what I call selfishness, and selfishness is a most detestable thing, especially to any one of my temperament, for I am well known for my sympathetic nature.
In fact, you should take example by me; you could not possibly have a better model.
Now that you have the chance you had better avail yourself of it, for I am going back to Court almost immediately.
I am a great favourite at Court; in fact, the Prince and Princess were married yesterday in my honour.
Of course you know nothing of these matters, for you are a provincial.”  “There is no good talking to him,” said a Dragon-fly, who was sitting on the top of a large brown bulrush; “no good at all, for he has gone away.”  “Well, that is his loss, not mine,” answered the Rocket.
“I am not going to stop talking to him merely because he pays no attention.
I like hearing myself talk.
It is one of my greatest pleasures.
I often have long conversations all by myself, and I am so clever that sometimes I don’t understand a single word of what I am saying.”  “Then you should certainly lecture on Philosophy,” said the Dragon-fly; and he spread a pair of lovely gauze wings and soared away into the sky.
“How very silly of him not to stay here!” said the Rocket.
“I am sure that he has not often got such a chance of improving his mind.
However, I don’t care a bit.
Genius like mine is sure to be appreciated some day”; and he sank down a little deeper into the mud.
After some time a large White Duck swam up to him.
She had yellow legs, and webbed feet, and was considered a great beauty on account of her waddle.
“Quack, quack, quack,” she said.
“What a curious shape you are!  May I ask were you born like that, or is it the result of an accident?”  “It is quite evident that you have always lived in the country,” answered the Rocket, “otherwise you would know who I am.
However, I excuse your ignorance.
It would be unfair to expect other people to be as remarkable as oneself.
You will no doubt be surprised to hear that I can fly up into the sky, and come down in a shower of golden rain.”  “I don’t think much of that,” said the Duck, “as I cannot see what use it is to any one.
Now, if you could plough the fields like the ox, or draw a cart like the horse, or look after the sheep like the collie-dog, that would be something.”  “My good creature,” cried the Rocket in a very haughty tone of voice, “I see that you belong to the lower orders.
A person of my position is never useful.
We have certain accomplishments, and that is more than sufficient.
I have no sympathy myself with industry of any kind, least of all with such industries as you seem to recommend.
Indeed, I have always been of opinion that hard work is simply the refuge of people who have nothing whatever to do.”  “Well, well,” said the Duck, who was of a very peaceable disposition, and never quarrelled with any one, “everybody has different tastes.
I hope, at any rate, that you are going to take up your residence here.”  “Oh! dear no,” cried the Rocket.
“I am merely a visitor, a distinguished visitor.
The fact is that I find this place rather tedious.
There is neither society here, nor solitude.
In fact, it is essentially suburban.
I shall probably go back to Court, for I know that I am destined to make a sensation in the world.”  “I had thoughts of entering public life once myself,” remarked the Duck; “there are so many things that need reforming.
Indeed, I took the chair at a meeting some time ago, and we passed resolutions condemning everything that we did not like.
However, they did not seem to have much effect.
Now I go in for domesticity, and look after my family.”  “I am made for public life,” said the Rocket, “and so are all my relations, even the humblest of them.
Whenever we appear we excite great attention.
I have not actually appeared myself, but when I do so it will be a magnificent sight.
As for domesticity, it ages one rapidly, and distracts one’s mind from higher things.”  “Ah! the higher things of life, how fine they are!” said the Duck; “and that reminds me how hungry I feel”: and she swam away down the stream, saying, “Quack, quack, quack.”  “Come back! come back!” screamed the Rocket, “I have a great deal to say to you”; but the Duck paid no attention to him.
“I am glad that she has gone,” he said to himself, “she has a decidedly middle-class mind”; and he sank a little deeper still into the mud, and began to think about the loneliness of genius, when suddenly two little boys in white smocks came running down the bank, with a kettle and some faggots.
“This must be the deputation,” said the Rocket, and he tried to look very dignified.
“Hallo!” cried one of the boys, “look at this old stick!  I wonder how it came here”; and he picked the rocket out of the ditch.
“OLD Stick!” said the Rocket, “impossible!  GOLD Stick, that is what he said.
Gold Stick is very complimentary.
In fact, he mistakes me for one of the Court dignitaries!”  “Let us put it into the fire!” said the other boy, “it will help to boil the kettle.”  So they piled the faggots together, and put the Rocket on top, and lit the fire.
“This is magnificent,” cried the Rocket, “they are going to let me off in broad day-light, so that every one can see me.”  “We will go to sleep now,” they said, “and when we wake up the kettle will be boiled”; and they lay down on the grass, and shut their eyes.
The Rocket was very damp, so he took a long time to burn.
At last, however, the fire caught him.
“Now I am going off!” he cried, and he made himself very stiff and straight.
“I know I shall go much higher than the stars, much higher than the moon, much higher than the sun.
In fact, I shall go so high that—”  Fizz! Fizz! Fizz! and he went straight up into the air.
“Delightful!” he cried, “I shall go on like this for ever.
What a success I am!”  But nobody saw him.
Then he began to feel a curious tingling sensation all over him.
“Now I am going to explode,” he cried.
“I shall set the whole world on fire, and make such a noise that nobody will talk about anything else for a whole year.”  And he certainly did explode.
Bang! Bang! Bang! went the gunpowder.
There was no doubt about it.
But nobody heard him, not even the two little boys, for they were sound asleep.
Then all that was left of him was the stick, and this fell down on the back of a Goose who was taking a walk by the side of the ditch.
“Good heavens!” cried the Goose.
“It is going to rain sticks”; and she rushed into the water.
“I knew I should create a great sensation,” gasped the Rocket, and he went out.﻿High above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the Happy  Prince.
He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold, for eyes  he had two bright sapphires, and a large red ruby glowed on his  sword-hilt.
He was very much admired indeed.
“He is as beautiful as a weathercock,”  remarked one of the Town Councillors who wished to gain a reputation for  having artistic tastes; “only not quite so useful,” he added, fearing  lest people should think him unpractical, which he really was not.
“Why can’t you be like the Happy Prince?” asked a sensible mother of her  little boy who was crying for the moon.
“The Happy Prince never dreams  of crying for anything.”    “I am glad there is some one in the world who is quite happy,” muttered a  disappointed man as he gazed at the wonderful statue.
“He looks just like an angel,” said the Charity Children as they came out  of the cathedral in their bright scarlet cloaks and their clean white  pinafores.
“How do you know?” said the Mathematical Master, “you have never seen  one.”    “Ah! but we have, in our dreams,” answered the children; and the  Mathematical Master frowned and looked very severe, for he did not  approve of children dreaming.
One night there flew over the city a little Swallow.
His friends had  gone away to Egypt six weeks before, but he had stayed behind, for he was  in love with the most beautiful Reed.
He had met her early in the spring  as he was flying down the river after a big yellow moth, and had been so  attracted by her slender waist that he had stopped to talk to her.
“Shall I love you?” said the Swallow, who liked to come to the point at  once, and the Reed made him a low bow.
So he flew round and round her,  touching the water with his wings, and making silver ripples.
This was  his courtship, and it lasted all through the summer.
“It is a ridiculous attachment,” twittered the other Swallows; “she has  no money, and far too many relations”; and indeed the river was quite  full of Reeds.
Then, when the autumn came they all flew away.
After they had gone he felt lonely, and began to tire of his lady-love.
“She has no conversation,” he said, “and I am afraid that she is a  coquette, for she is always flirting with the wind.”  And certainly,  whenever the wind blew, the Reed made the most graceful curtseys.
“I  admit that she is domestic,” he continued, “but I love travelling, and my  wife, consequently, should love travelling also.”    “Will you come away with me?” he said finally to her; but the Reed shook  her head, she was so attached to her home.
“You have been trifling with me,” he cried.
“I am off to the Pyramids.
Good-bye!” and he flew away.
All day long he flew, and at night-time he arrived at the city.
“Where  shall I put up?” he said; “I hope the town has made preparations.”    Then he saw the statue on the tall column.
“I will put up there,” he cried; “it is a fine position, with plenty of  fresh air.”  So he alighted just between the feet of the Happy Prince.
“I have a golden bedroom,” he said softly to himself as he looked round,  and he prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head under  his wing a large drop of water fell on him.
“What a curious thing!” he  cried; “there is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars are quite clear  and bright, and yet it is raining.
The climate in the north of Europe is  really dreadful.
The Reed used to like the rain, but that was merely her  selfishness.”    Then another drop fell.
“What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain off?” he said; “I  must look for a good chimney-pot,” and he determined to fly away.
But before he had opened his wings, a third drop fell, and he looked up,  and saw—Ah! what did he see?
The eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears, and tears were  running down his golden cheeks.
His face was so beautiful in the  moonlight that the little Swallow was filled with pity.
“Who are you?” he said.
“I am the Happy Prince.”    “Why are you weeping then?” asked the Swallow; “you have quite drenched  me.”    “When I was alive and had a human heart,” answered the statue, “I did not  know what tears were, for I lived in the Palace of Sans-Souci, where  sorrow is not allowed to enter.
In the daytime I played with my  companions in the garden, and in the evening I led the dance in the Great  Hall.
Round the garden ran a very lofty wall, but I never cared to ask  what lay beyond it, everything about me was so beautiful.
My courtiers  called me the Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was, if pleasure be  happiness.
So I lived, and so I died.
And now that I am dead they have  set me up here so high that I can see all the ugliness and all the misery  of my city, and though my heart is made of lead yet I cannot chose but  weep.”    “What! is he not solid gold?” said the Swallow to himself.
He was too  polite to make any personal remarks out loud.
“Far away,” continued the statue in a low musical voice, “far away in a  little street there is a poor house.
One of the windows is open, and  through it I can see a woman seated at a table.
Her face is thin and  worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the needle, for she  is a seamstress.
She is embroidering passion-flowers on a satin gown for  the loveliest of the Queen’s maids-of-honour to wear at the next  Court-ball.
In a bed in the corner of the room her little boy is lying  ill.
He has a fever, and is asking for oranges.
His mother has nothing  to give him but river water, so he is crying.
Swallow, Swallow, little  Swallow, will you not bring her the ruby out of my sword-hilt?
My feet  are fastened to this pedestal and I cannot move.”    “I am waited for in Egypt,” said the Swallow.
“My friends are flying up  and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotus-flowers.
Soon they  will go to sleep in the tomb of the great King.
The King is there  himself in his painted coffin.
He is wrapped in yellow linen, and  embalmed with spices.
Round his neck is a chain of pale green jade, and  his hands are like withered leaves.”    “Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay  with me for one night, and be my messenger?
The boy is so thirsty, and  the mother so sad.”    “I don’t think I like boys,” answered the Swallow.
“Last summer, when I  was staying on the river, there were two rude boys, the miller’s sons,  who were always throwing stones at me.
They never hit me, of course; we  swallows fly far too well for that, and besides, I come of a family  famous for its agility; but still, it was a mark of disrespect.”    But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little Swallow was sorry.
“It is very cold here,” he said; “but I will stay with you for one night,  and be your messenger.”    “Thank you, little Swallow,” said the Prince.
So the Swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince’s sword, and  flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.
He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels were  sculptured.
He passed by the palace and heard the sound of dancing.
A  beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover.
“How wonderful  the stars are,” he said to her, “and how wonderful is the power of love!”    “I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State-ball,” she answered;  “I have ordered passion-flowers to be embroidered on it; but the  seamstresses are so lazy.”    He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging to the masts of  the ships.
He passed over the Ghetto, and saw the old Jews bargaining  with each other, and weighing out money in copper scales.
At last he  came to the poor house and looked in.
The boy was tossing feverishly on  his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired.
In he  hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman’s thimble.
Then he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy’s forehead with his  wings.
“How cool I feel,” said the boy, “I must be getting better”; and  he sank into a delicious slumber.
Then the Swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him what he had  done.
“It is curious,” he remarked, “but I feel quite warm now, although  it is so cold.”    “That is because you have done a good action,” said the Prince.
And the  little Swallow began to think, and then he fell asleep.
Thinking always  made him sleepy.
When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath.
“What a  remarkable phenomenon,” said the Professor of Ornithology as he was  passing over the bridge.
“A swallow in winter!”  And he wrote a long  letter about it to the local newspaper.
Every one quoted it, it was full  of so many words that they could not understand.
“To-night I go to Egypt,” said the Swallow, and he was in high spirits at  the prospect.
He visited all the public monuments, and sat a long time  on top of the church steeple.
Wherever he went the Sparrows chirruped,  and said to each other, “What a distinguished stranger!” so he enjoyed  himself very much.
When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
“Have you any  commissions for Egypt?” he cried; “I am just starting.”    “Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay  with me one night longer?”    “I am waited for in Egypt,” answered the Swallow.
“To-morrow my friends  will fly up to the Second Cataract.
The river-horse couches there among  the bulrushes, and on a great granite throne sits the God Memnon.
All  night long he watches the stars, and when the morning star shines he  utters one cry of joy, and then he is silent.
At noon the yellow lions  come down to the water’s edge to drink.
They have eyes like green  beryls, and their roar is louder than the roar of the cataract.”    “Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “far away across the  city I see a young man in a garret.
He is leaning over a desk covered  with papers, and in a tumbler by his side there is a bunch of withered  violets.
His hair is brown and crisp, and his lips are red as a  pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes.
He is trying to finish a  play for the Director of the Theatre, but he is too cold to write any  more.
There is no fire in the grate, and hunger has made him faint.”    “I will wait with you one night longer,” said the Swallow, who really had  a good heart.
“Shall I take him another ruby?”    “Alas!  I have no ruby now,” said the Prince; “my eyes are all that I  have left.
They are made of rare sapphires, which were brought out of  India a thousand years ago.
Pluck out one of them and take it to him.
He will sell it to the jeweller, and buy food and firewood, and finish  his play.”    “Dear Prince,” said the Swallow, “I cannot do that”; and he began to  weep.
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I command  you.”    So the Swallow plucked out the Prince’s eye, and flew away to the  student’s garret.
It was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in  the roof.
Through this he darted, and came into the room.
The young man  had his head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the  bird’s wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful sapphire lying  on the withered violets.
“I am beginning to be appreciated,” he cried; “this is from some great  admirer.
Now I can finish my play,” and he looked quite happy.
The next day the Swallow flew down to the harbour.
He sat on the mast of  a large vessel and watched the sailors hauling big chests out of the hold  with ropes.
“Heave a-hoy!” they shouted as each chest came up.
“I am  going to Egypt”! cried the Swallow, but nobody minded, and when the moon  rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
“I am come to bid you good-bye,” he cried.
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay  with me one night longer?”    “It is winter,” answered the Swallow, “and the chill snow will soon be  here.
In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm-trees, and the  crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them.
My companions are  building a nest in the Temple of Baalbec, and the pink and white doves  are watching them, and cooing to each other.
Dear Prince, I must leave  you, but I will never forget you, and next spring I will bring you back  two beautiful jewels in place of those you have given away.
The ruby  shall be redder than a red rose, and the sapphire shall be as blue as the  great sea.”    “In the square below,” said the Happy Prince, “there stands a little  match-girl.
She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and they are all  spoiled.
Her father will beat her if she does not bring home some money,  and she is crying.
She has no shoes or stockings, and her little head is  bare.
Pluck out my other eye, and give it to her, and her father will  not beat her.”    “I will stay with you one night longer,” said the Swallow, “but I cannot  pluck out your eye.
You would be quite blind then.”    “Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I command  you.”    So he plucked out the Prince’s other eye, and darted down with it.
He  swooped past the match-girl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her  hand.
“What a lovely bit of glass,” cried the little girl; and she ran  home, laughing.
Then the Swallow came back to the Prince.
“You are blind now,” he said,  “so I will stay with you always.”    “No, little Swallow,” said the poor Prince, “you must go away to Egypt.”    “I will stay with you always,” said the Swallow, and he slept at the  Prince’s feet.
All the next day he sat on the Prince’s shoulder, and told him stories of  what he had seen in strange lands.
He told him of the red ibises, who  stand in long rows on the banks of the Nile, and catch gold-fish in their  beaks; of the Sphinx, who is as old as the world itself, and lives in the  desert, and knows everything; of the merchants, who walk slowly by the  side of their camels, and carry amber beads in their hands; of the King  of the Mountains of the Moon, who is as black as ebony, and worships a  large crystal; of the great green snake that sleeps in a palm-tree, and  has twenty priests to feed it with honey-cakes; and of the pygmies who  sail over a big lake on large flat leaves, and are always at war with the  butterflies.
“Dear little Swallow,” said the Prince, “you tell me of marvellous  things, but more marvellous than anything is the suffering of men and of  women.
There is no Mystery so great as Misery.
Fly over my city, little  Swallow, and tell me what you see there.”    So the Swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making merry in  their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at the gates.
He  flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of starving children  looking out listlessly at the black streets.
Under the archway of a  bridge two little boys were lying in one another’s arms to try and keep  themselves warm.
“How hungry we are!” they said.
“You must not lie  here,” shouted the Watchman, and they wandered out into the rain.
Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.
“I am covered with fine gold,” said the Prince, “you must take it off,  leaf by leaf, and give it to my poor; the living always think that gold  can make them happy.”    Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the Swallow picked off, till the Happy  Prince looked quite dull and grey.
Leaf after leaf of the fine gold he  brought to the poor, and the children’s faces grew rosier, and they  laughed and played games in the street.
“We have bread now!” they cried.
Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost.
The streets  looked as if they were made of silver, they were so bright and  glistening; long icicles like crystal daggers hung down from the eaves of  the houses, everybody went about in furs, and the little boys wore  scarlet caps and skated on the ice.
The poor little Swallow grew colder and colder, but he would not leave  the Prince, he loved him too well.
He picked up crumbs outside the  baker’s door when the baker was not looking and tried to keep himself  warm by flapping his wings.
But at last he knew that he was going to die.
He had just strength to  fly up to the Prince’s shoulder once more.
“Good-bye, dear Prince!” he  murmured, “will you let me kiss your hand?”    “I am glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow,” said the  Prince, “you have stayed too long here; but you must kiss me on the lips,  for I love you.”    “It is not to Egypt that I am going,” said the Swallow.
“I am going to  the House of Death.
Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not?”    And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down dead at his  feet.
At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as if something  had broken.
The fact is that the leaden heart had snapped right in two.
It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.
Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square below in  company with the Town Councillors.
As they passed the column he looked  up at the statue: “Dear me! how shabby the Happy Prince looks!” he said.
“How shabby indeed!” cried the Town Councillors, who always agreed with  the Mayor; and they went up to look at it.
“The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and he is  golden no longer,” said the Mayor in fact, “he is litttle better than a  beggar!”    “Little better than a beggar,” said the Town Councillors.
“And here is actually a dead bird at his feet!” continued the Mayor.
“We  must really issue a proclamation that birds are not to be allowed to die  here.”  And the Town Clerk made a note of the suggestion.
So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince.
“As he is no longer  beautiful he is no longer useful,” said the Art Professor at the  University.
Then they melted the statue in a furnace, and the Mayor held a meeting of  the Corporation to decide what was to be done with the metal.
“We must  have another statue, of course,” he said, “and it shall be a statue of  myself.”    “Of myself,” said each of the Town Councillors, and they quarrelled.
When I last heard of them they were quarrelling still.
“What a strange thing!” said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry.
“This broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace.
We must throw it  away.”  So they threw it on a dust-heap where the dead Swallow was also  lying.
“Bring me the two most precious things in the city,” said God to one of  His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden heart and the dead bird.
“You have rightly chosen,” said God, “for in my garden of Paradise this  little bird shall sing for evermore, and in my city of gold the Happy  Prince shall praise me.”        The Nightingale and the Rose.
“SHE said that she would dance with me if I brought her red roses,” cried  the young Student; “but in all my garden there is no red rose.”    From her nest in the holm-oak tree the Nightingale heard him, and she  looked out through the leaves, and wondered.
“No red rose in all my garden!” he cried, and his beautiful eyes filled  with tears.
“Ah, on what little things does happiness depend!  I have  read all that the wise men have written, and all the secrets of  philosophy are mine, yet for want of a red rose is my life made  wretched.”    “Here at last is a true lover,” said the Nightingale.
“Night after night  have I sung of him, though I knew him not: night after night have I told  his story to the stars, and now I see him.
His hair is dark as the  hyacinth-blossom, and his lips are red as the rose of his desire; but  passion has made his face like pale ivory, and sorrow has set her seal  upon his brow.”    “The Prince gives a ball to-morrow night,” murmured the young Student,  “and my love will be of the company.
If I bring her a red rose she will  dance with me till dawn.
If I bring her a red rose, I shall hold her in  my arms, and she will lean her head upon my shoulder, and her hand will  be clasped in mine.
But there is no red rose in my garden, so I shall  sit lonely, and she will pass me by.
She will have no heed of me, and my  heart will break.”    “Here indeed is the true lover,” said the Nightingale.
“What I sing of,  he suffers—what is joy to me, to him is pain.
Surely Love is a wonderful  thing.
It is more precious than emeralds, and dearer than fine opals.
Pearls and pomegranates cannot buy it, nor is it set forth in the  marketplace.
It may not be purchased of the merchants, nor can it be  weighed out in the balance for gold.”    “The musicians will sit in their gallery,” said the young Student, “and  play upon their stringed instruments, and my love will dance to the sound  of the harp and the violin.
She will dance so lightly that her feet will  not touch the floor, and the courtiers in their gay dresses will throng  round her.
But with me she will not dance, for I have no red rose to  give her”; and he flung himself down on the grass, and buried his face in  his hands, and wept.
“Why is he weeping?” asked a little Green Lizard, as he ran past him with  his tail in the air.
“Why, indeed?” said a Butterfly, who was fluttering about after a  sunbeam.
“Why, indeed?” whispered a Daisy to his neighbour, in a soft, low voice.
“He is weeping for a red rose,” said the Nightingale.
“For a red rose?” they cried; “how very ridiculous!” and the little  Lizard, who was something of a cynic, laughed outright.
But the Nightingale understood the secret of the Student’s sorrow, and  she sat silent in the oak-tree, and thought about the mystery of Love.
Suddenly she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She passed through the grove like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed  across the garden.
In the centre of the grass-plot was standing a beautiful Rose-tree, and  when she saw it she flew over to it, and lit upon a spray.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”    But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are white,” it answered; “as white as the foam of the sea, and  whiter than the snow upon the mountain.
But go to my brother who grows  round the old sun-dial, and perhaps he will give you what you want.”    So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing round the  old sun-dial.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”    But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are yellow,” it answered; “as yellow as the hair of the  mermaiden who sits upon an amber throne, and yellower than the daffodil  that blooms in the meadow before the mower comes with his scythe.
But go  to my brother who grows beneath the Student’s window, and perhaps he will  give you what you want.”    So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing beneath  the Student’s window.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”    But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are red,” it answered, “as red as the feet of the dove, and  redder than the great fans of coral that wave and wave in the  ocean-cavern.
But the winter has chilled my veins, and the frost has  nipped my buds, and the storm has broken my branches, and I shall have no  roses at all this year.”    “One red rose is all I want,” cried the Nightingale, “only one red rose!  Is there no way by which I can get it?”    “There is a way,” answered the Tree; “but it is so terrible that I dare  not tell it to you.”    “Tell it to me,” said the Nightingale, “I am not afraid.”    “If you want a red rose,” said the Tree, “you must build it out of music  by moonlight, and stain it with your own heart’s-blood.
You must sing to  me with your breast against a thorn.
All night long you must sing to me,  and the thorn must pierce your heart, and your life-blood must flow into  my veins, and become mine.”    “Death is a great price to pay for a red rose,” cried the Nightingale,  “and Life is very dear to all.
It is pleasant to sit in the green wood,  and to watch the Sun in his chariot of gold, and the Moon in her chariot  of pearl.
Sweet is the scent of the hawthorn, and sweet are the  bluebells that hide in the valley, and the heather that blows on the  hill.
Yet Love is better than Life, and what is the heart of a bird  compared to the heart of a man?”    So she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She  swept over the garden like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed through  the grove.
The young Student was still lying on the grass, where she had left him,  and the tears were not yet dry in his beautiful eyes.
“Be happy,” cried the Nightingale, “be happy; you shall have your red  rose.
I will build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with my  own heart’s-blood.
All that I ask of you in return is that you will be a  true lover, for Love is wiser than Philosophy, though she is wise, and  mightier than Power, though he is mighty.
Flame-coloured are his wings,  and coloured like flame is his body.
His lips are sweet as honey, and  his breath is like frankincense.”    The Student looked up from the grass, and listened, but he could not  understand what the Nightingale was saying to him, for he only knew the  things that are written down in books.
But the Oak-tree understood, and felt sad, for he was very fond of the  little Nightingale who had built her nest in his branches.
“Sing me one last song,” he whispered; “I shall feel very lonely when you  are gone.”    So the Nightingale sang to the Oak-tree, and her voice was like water  bubbling from a silver jar.
When she had finished her song the Student got up, and pulled a note-book  and a lead-pencil out of his pocket.
“She has form,” he said to himself, as he walked away through the  grove—“that cannot be denied to her; but has she got feeling?
I am  afraid not.
In fact, she is like most artists; she is all style, without  any sincerity.
She would not sacrifice herself for others.
She thinks  merely of music, and everybody knows that the arts are selfish.
Still,  it must be admitted that she has some beautiful notes in her voice.
What  a pity it is that they do not mean anything, or do any practical good.”  And he went into his room, and lay down on his little pallet-bed, and  began to think of his love; and, after a time, he fell asleep.
And when the Moon shone in the heavens the Nightingale flew to the  Rose-tree, and set her breast against the thorn.
All night long she sang  with her breast against the thorn, and the cold crystal Moon leaned down  and listened.
All night long she sang, and the thorn went deeper and  deeper into her breast, and her life-blood ebbed away from her.
She sang first of the birth of love in the heart of a boy and a girl.
And on the top-most spray of the Rose-tree there blossomed a marvellous  rose, petal following petal, as song followed song.
Pale was it, at  first, as the mist that hangs over the river—pale as the feet of the  morning, and silver as the wings of the dawn.
As the shadow of a rose in  a mirror of silver, as the shadow of a rose in a water-pool, so was the  rose that blossomed on the topmost spray of the Tree.
But the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come  before the rose is finished.”    So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and louder and  louder grew her song, for she sang of the birth of passion in the soul of  a man and a maid.
And a delicate flush of pink came into the leaves of the rose, like the  flush in the face of the bridegroom when he kisses the lips of the bride.
But the thorn had not yet reached her heart, so the rose’s heart remained  white, for only a Nightingale’s heart’s-blood can crimson the heart of a  rose.
And the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come  before the rose is finished.”    So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and the thorn  touched her heart, and a fierce pang of pain shot through her.
Bitter,  bitter was the pain, and wilder and wilder grew her song, for she sang of  the Love that is perfected by Death, of the Love that dies not in the  tomb.
And the marvellous rose became crimson, like the rose of the eastern sky.
Crimson was the girdle of petals, and crimson as a ruby was the heart.
But the Nightingale’s voice grew fainter, and her little wings began to  beat, and a film came over her eyes.
Fainter and fainter grew her song,  and she felt something choking her in her throat.
Then she gave one last burst of music.
The white Moon heard it, and she  forgot the dawn, and lingered on in the sky.
The red rose heard it, and  it trembled all over with ecstasy, and opened its petals to the cold  morning air.
Echo bore it to her purple cavern in the hills, and woke  the sleeping shepherds from their dreams.
It floated through the reeds  of the river, and they carried its message to the sea.
“Look, look!” cried the Tree, “the rose is finished now”; but the  Nightingale made no answer, for she was lying dead in the long grass,  with the thorn in her heart.
And at noon the Student opened his window and looked out.
“Why, what a wonderful piece of luck!” he cried; “here is a red rose!  I  have never seen any rose like it in all my life.
It is so beautiful that  I am sure it has a long Latin name”; and he leaned down and plucked it.
Then he put on his hat, and ran up to the Professor’s house with the rose  in his hand.
The daughter of the Professor was sitting in the doorway winding blue  silk on a reel, and her little dog was lying at her feet.
“You said that you would dance with me if I brought you a red rose,”  cried the Student.
“Here is the reddest rose in all the world.
You will  wear it to-night next your heart, and as we dance together it will tell  you how I love you.”    But the girl frowned.
“I am afraid it will not go with my dress,” she answered; “and, besides,  the Chamberlain’s nephew has sent me some real jewels, and everybody  knows that jewels cost far more than flowers.”    “Well, upon my word, you are very ungrateful,” said the Student angrily;  and he threw the rose into the street, where it fell into the gutter, and  a cart-wheel went over it.
“Ungrateful!” said the girl.
“I tell you what, you are very rude; and,  after all, who are you?
Only a Student.
Why, I don’t believe you have  even got silver buckles to your shoes as the Chamberlain’s nephew has”;  and she got up from her chair and went into the house.
“What a silly thing Love is,” said the Student as he walked away.
“It  is not half as useful as Logic, for it does not prove anything, and it is  always telling one of things that are not going to happen, and making one  believe things that are not true.
In fact, it is quite unpractical, and,  as in this age to be practical is everything, I shall go back to  Philosophy and study Metaphysics.”    So he returned to his room and pulled out a great dusty book, and began  to read.
The Selfish Giant.
EVERY afternoon, as they were coming from school, the children used to go  and play in the Giant’s garden.
It was a large lovely garden, with soft green grass.
Here and there over  the grass stood beautiful flowers like stars, and there were twelve  peach-trees that in the spring-time broke out into delicate blossoms of  pink and pearl, and in the autumn bore rich fruit.
The birds sat on the  trees and sang so sweetly that the children used to stop their games in  order to listen to them.
“How happy we are here!” they cried to each  other.
One day the Giant came back.
He had been to visit his friend the Cornish  ogre, and had stayed with him for seven years.
After the seven years  were over he had said all that he had to say, for his conversation was  limited, and he determined to return to his own castle.
When he arrived  he saw the children playing in the garden.
“What are you doing here?” he cried in a very gruff voice, and the  children ran away.
“My own garden is my own garden,” said the Giant; “any one can understand  that, and I will allow nobody to play in it but myself.”  So he built a  high wall all round it, and put up a notice-board.
TRESPASSERS                WILL BE               PROSECUTED    He was a very selfish Giant.
The poor children had now nowhere to play.
They tried to play on the  road, but the road was very dusty and full of hard stones, and they did  not like it.
They used to wander round the high wall when their lessons  were over, and talk about the beautiful garden inside.
“How happy we  were there,” they said to each other.
Then the Spring came, and all over the country there were little blossoms  and little birds.
Only in the garden of the Selfish Giant it was still  winter.
The birds did not care to sing in it as there were no children,  and the trees forgot to blossom.
Once a beautiful flower put its head  out from the grass, but when it saw the notice-board it was so sorry for  the children that it slipped back into the ground again, and went off to  sleep.
The only people who were pleased were the Snow and the Frost.
“Spring has forgotten this garden,” they cried, “so we will live here all  the year round.”  The Snow covered up the grass with her great white  cloak, and the Frost painted all the trees silver.
Then they invited the  North Wind to stay with them, and he came.
He was wrapped in furs, and  he roared all day about the garden, and blew the chimney-pots down.
“This is a delightful spot,” he said, “we must ask the Hail on a visit.”  So the Hail came.
Every day for three hours he rattled on the roof of  the castle till he broke most of the slates, and then he ran round and  round the garden as fast as he could go.
He was dressed in grey, and his  breath was like ice.
“I cannot understand why the Spring is so late in coming,” said the  Selfish Giant, as he sat at the window and looked out at his cold white  garden; “I hope there will be a change in the weather.”    But the Spring never came, nor the Summer.
The Autumn gave golden fruit  to every garden, but to the Giant’s garden she gave none.
“He is too  selfish,” she said.
So it was always Winter there, and the North Wind,  and the Hail, and the Frost, and the Snow danced about through the trees.
One morning the Giant was lying awake in bed when he heard some lovely  music.
It sounded so sweet to his ears that he thought it must be the  King’s musicians passing by.
It was really only a little linnet singing  outside his window, but it was so long since he had heard a bird sing in  his garden that it seemed to him to be the most beautiful music in the  world.
Then the Hail stopped dancing over his head, and the North Wind  ceased roaring, and a delicious perfume came to him through the open  casement.
“I believe the Spring has come at last,” said the Giant; and  he jumped out of bed and looked out.
What did he see?
He saw a most wonderful sight.
Through a little hole in the wall the  children had crept in, and they were sitting in the branches of the  trees.
In every tree that he could see there was a little child.
And  the trees were so glad to have the children back again that they had  covered themselves with blossoms, and were waving their arms gently above  the children’s heads.
The birds were flying about and twittering with  delight, and the flowers were looking up through the green grass and  laughing.
It was a lovely scene, only in one corner it was still winter.
It was the farthest corner of the garden, and in it was standing a little  boy.
He was so small that he could not reach up to the branches of the  tree, and he was wandering all round it, crying bitterly.
The poor tree  was still quite covered with frost and snow, and the North Wind was  blowing and roaring above it.
“Climb up! little boy,” said the Tree, and  it bent its branches down as low as it could; but the boy was too tiny.
And the Giant’s heart melted as he looked out.
“How selfish I have  been!” he said; “now I know why the Spring would not come here.
I will  put that poor little boy on the top of the tree, and then I will knock  down the wall, and my garden shall be the children’s playground for ever  and ever.”  He was really very sorry for what he had done.
So he crept downstairs and opened the front door quite softly, and went  out into the garden.
But when the children saw him they were so  frightened that they all ran away, and the garden became winter again.
Only the little boy did not run, for his eyes were so full of tears that  he did not see the Giant coming.
And the Giant stole up behind him and  took him gently in his hand, and put him up into the tree.
And the tree  broke at once into blossom, and the birds came and sang on it, and the  little boy stretched out his two arms and flung them round the Giant’s  neck, and kissed him.
And the other children, when they saw that the  Giant was not wicked any longer, came running back, and with them came  the Spring.
“It is your garden now, little children,” said the Giant,  and he took a great axe and knocked down the wall.
And when the people  were going to market at twelve o’clock they found the Giant playing with  the children in the most beautiful garden they had ever seen.
All day long they played, and in the evening they came to the Giant to  bid him good-bye.
“But where is your little companion?” he said: “the boy I put into the  tree.”  The Giant loved him the best because he had kissed him.
“We don’t know,” answered the children; “he has gone away.”    “You must tell him to be sure and come here to-morrow,” said the Giant.
But the children said that they did not know where he lived, and had  never seen him before; and the Giant felt very sad.
Every afternoon, when school was over, the children came and played with  the Giant.
But the little boy whom the Giant loved was never seen again.
The Giant was very kind to all the children, yet he longed for his first  little friend, and often spoke of him.
“How I would like to see him!” he  used to say.
Years went over, and the Giant grew very old and feeble.
He could not  play about any more, so he sat in a huge armchair, and watched the  children at their games, and admired his garden.
“I have many beautiful  flowers,” he said; “but the children are the most beautiful flowers of  all.”    One winter morning he looked out of his window as he was dressing.
He  did not hate the Winter now, for he knew that it was merely the Spring  asleep, and that the flowers were resting.
Suddenly he rubbed his eyes in wonder, and looked and looked.
It  certainly was a marvellous sight.
In the farthest corner of the garden  was a tree quite covered with lovely white blossoms.
Its branches were  all golden, and silver fruit hung down from them, and underneath it stood  the little boy he had loved.
Downstairs ran the Giant in great joy, and out into the garden.
He  hastened across the grass, and came near to the child.
And when he came  quite close his face grew red with anger, and he said, “Who hath dared to  wound thee?”  For on the palms of the child’s hands were the prints of  two nails, and the prints of two nails were on the little feet.
“Who hath dared to wound thee?” cried the Giant; “tell me, that I may  take my big sword and slay him.”    “Nay!” answered the child; “but these are the wounds of Love.”    “Who art thou?” said the Giant, and a strange awe fell on him, and he  knelt before the little child.
And the child smiled on the Giant, and said to him, “You let me play once  in your garden, to-day you shall come with me to my garden, which is  Paradise.”    And when the children ran in that afternoon, they found the Giant lying  dead under the tree, all covered with white blossoms.
The Devoted Friend.
ONE morning the old Water-rat put his head out of his hole.
He had  bright beady eyes and stiff grey whiskers and his tail was like a long  bit of black india-rubber.
The little ducks were swimming about in the  pond, looking just like a lot of yellow canaries, and their mother, who  was pure white with real red legs, was trying to teach them how to stand  on their heads in the water.
“You will never be in the best society unless you can stand on your  heads,” she kept saying to them; and every now and then she showed them  how it was done.
But the little ducks paid no attention to her.
They  were so young that they did not know what an advantage it is to be in  society at all.
“What disobedient children!” cried the old Water-rat; “they really  deserve to be drowned.”    “Nothing of the kind,” answered the Duck, “every one must make a  beginning, and parents cannot be too patient.”    “Ah! I know nothing about the feelings of parents,” said the Water-rat;  “I am not a family man.
In fact, I have never been married, and I never  intend to be.
Love is all very well in its way, but friendship is much  higher.
Indeed, I know of nothing in the world that is either nobler or  rarer than a devoted friendship.”    “And what, pray, is your idea of the duties of a devoted friend?” asked a  Green Linnet, who was sitting in a willow-tree hard by, and had overheard  the conversation.
“Yes, that is just what I want to know,” said the Duck; and she swam away  to the end of the pond, and stood upon her head, in order to give her  children a good example.
“What a silly question!” cried the Water-rat.
“I should expect my  devoted friend to be devoted to me, of course.”    “And what would you do in return?” said the little bird, swinging upon a  silver spray, and flapping his tiny wings.
“I don’t understand you,” answered the Water-rat.
“Let me tell you a story on the subject,” said the Linnet.
“Is the story about me?” asked the Water-rat.
“If so, I will listen to  it, for I am extremely fond of fiction.”    “It is applicable to you,” answered the Linnet; and he flew down, and  alighting upon the bank, he told the story of The Devoted Friend.
“Once upon a time,” said the Linnet, “there was an honest little fellow  named Hans.”    “Was he very distinguished?” asked the Water-rat.
“No,” answered the Linnet, “I don’t think he was distinguished at all,  except for his kind heart, and his funny round good-humoured face.
He  lived in a tiny cottage all by himself, and every day he worked in his  garden.
In all the country-side there was no garden so lovely as his.
Sweet-william grew there, and Gilly-flowers, and Shepherds’-purses, and  Fair-maids of France.
There were damask Roses, and yellow Roses, lilac  Crocuses, and gold, purple Violets and white.
Columbine and Ladysmock,  Marjoram and Wild Basil, the Cowslip and the Flower-de-luce, the Daffodil  and the Clove-Pink bloomed or blossomed in their proper order as the  months went by, one flower taking another flower’s place, so that there  were always beautiful things to look at, and pleasant odours to smell.
“Little Hans had a great many friends, but the most devoted friend of all  was big Hugh the Miller.
Indeed, so devoted was the rich Miller to  little Hans, that he would never go by his garden without leaning over  the wall and plucking a large nosegay, or a handful of sweet herbs, or  filling his pockets with plums and cherries if it was the fruit season.
“‘Real friends should have everything in common,’ the Miller used to say,  and little Hans nodded and smiled, and felt very proud of having a friend  with such noble ideas.
“Sometimes, indeed, the neighbours thought it strange that the rich  Miller never gave little Hans anything in return, though he had a hundred  sacks of flour stored away in his mill, and six milch cows, and a large  flock of woolly sheep; but Hans never troubled his head about these  things, and nothing gave him greater pleasure than to listen to all the  wonderful things the Miller used to say about the unselfishness of true  friendship.
“So little Hans worked away in his garden.
During the spring, the  summer, and the autumn he was very happy, but when the winter came, and  he had no fruit or flowers to bring to the market, he suffered a good  deal from cold and hunger, and often had to go to bed without any supper  but a few dried pears or some hard nuts.
In the winter, also, he was  extremely lonely, as the Miller never came to see him then.
“‘There is no good in my going to see little Hans as long as the snow  lasts,’ the Miller used to say to his wife, ‘for when people are in  trouble they should be left alone, and not be bothered by visitors.
That  at least is my idea about friendship, and I am sure I am right.
So I  shall wait till the spring comes, and then I shall pay him a visit, and  he will be able to give me a large basket of primroses and that will make  him so happy.’    “‘You are certainly very thoughtful about others,’ answered the Wife, as  she sat in her comfortable armchair by the big pinewood fire; ‘very  thoughtful indeed.
It is quite a treat to hear you talk about  friendship.
I am sure the clergyman himself could not say such beautiful  things as you do, though he does live in a three-storied house, and wear  a gold ring on his little finger.’    “‘But could we not ask little Hans up here?’ said the Miller’s youngest  son.
‘If poor Hans is in trouble I will give him half my porridge, and  show him my white rabbits.’    “‘What a silly boy you are!’ cried the Miller; ‘I really don’t know what  is the use of sending you to school.
You seem not to learn anything.
Why, if little Hans came up here, and saw our warm fire, and our good  supper, and our great cask of red wine, he might get envious, and envy is  a most terrible thing, and would spoil anybody’s nature.
I certainly  will not allow Hans’ nature to be spoiled.
I am his best friend, and I  will always watch over him, and see that he is not led into any  temptations.
Besides, if Hans came here, he might ask me to let him have  some flour on credit, and that I could not do.
Flour is one thing, and  friendship is another, and they should not be confused.
Why, the words  are spelt differently, and mean quite different things.
Everybody can  see that.’    “‘How well you talk!’ said the Miller’s Wife, pouring herself out a large  glass of warm ale; ‘really I feel quite drowsy.
It is just like being in  church.’    “‘Lots of people act well,’ answered the Miller; ‘but very few people  talk well, which shows that talking is much the more difficult thing of  the two, and much the finer thing also’; and he looked sternly across the  table at his little son, who felt so ashamed of himself that he hung his  head down, and grew quite scarlet, and began to cry into his tea.
However, he was so young that you must excuse him.”    “Is that the end of the story?” asked the Water-rat.
“Certainly not,” answered the Linnet, “that is the beginning.”    “Then you are quite behind the age,” said the Water-rat.
“Every good  story-teller nowadays starts with the end, and then goes on to the  beginning, and concludes with the middle.
That is the new method.
I  heard all about it the other day from a critic who was walking round the  pond with a young man.
He spoke of the matter at great length, and I am  sure he must have been right, for he had blue spectacles and a bald head,  and whenever the young man made any remark, he always answered ‘Pooh!’  But pray go on with your story.
I like the Miller immensely.
I have all  kinds of beautiful sentiments myself, so there is a great sympathy  between us.”    “Well,” said the Linnet, hopping now on one leg and now on the other, “as  soon as the winter was over, and the primroses began to open their pale  yellow stars, the Miller said to his wife that he would go down and see  little Hans.
“‘Why, what a good heart you have!’ cried his Wife; ‘you are always  thinking of others.
And mind you take the big basket with you for the  flowers.’    “So the Miller tied the sails of the windmill together with a strong iron  chain, and went down the hill with the basket on his arm.
“‘Good morning, little Hans,’ said the Miller.
“‘Good morning,’ said Hans, leaning on his spade, and smiling from ear to  ear.
“‘And how have you been all the winter?’ said the Miller.
“‘Well, really,’ cried Hans, ‘it is very good of you to ask, very good  indeed.
I am afraid I had rather a hard time of it, but now the spring  has come, and I am quite happy, and all my flowers are doing well.’    “‘We often talked of you during the winter, Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘and  wondered how you were getting on.’    “‘That was kind of you,’ said Hans; ‘I was half afraid you had forgotten  me.’    “‘Hans, I am surprised at you,’ said the Miller; ‘friendship never  forgets.
That is the wonderful thing about it, but I am afraid you don’t  understand the poetry of life.
How lovely your primroses are looking,  by-the-bye!”    “‘They are certainly very lovely,’ said Hans, ‘and it is a most lucky  thing for me that I have so many.
I am going to bring them into the  market and sell them to the Burgomaster’s daughter, and buy back my  wheelbarrow with the money.’    “‘Buy back your wheelbarrow?
You don’t mean to say you have sold it?
What a very stupid thing to do!’    “‘Well, the fact is,’ said Hans, ‘that I was obliged to.
You see the  winter was a very bad time for me, and I really had no money at all to  buy bread with.
So I first sold the silver buttons off my Sunday coat,  and then I sold my silver chain, and then I sold my big pipe, and at last  I sold my wheelbarrow.
But I am going to buy them all back again now.’    “‘Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘I will give you my wheelbarrow.
It is not in  very good repair; indeed, one side is gone, and there is something wrong  with the wheel-spokes; but in spite of that I will give it to you.
I  know it is very generous of me, and a great many people would think me  extremely foolish for parting with it, but I am not like the rest of the  world.
I think that generosity is the essence of friendship, and,  besides, I have got a new wheelbarrow for myself.
Yes, you may set your  mind at ease, I will give you my wheelbarrow.’    “‘Well, really, that is generous of you,’ said little Hans, and his funny  round face glowed all over with pleasure.
‘I can easily put it in  repair, as I have a plank of wood in the house.’    “‘A plank of wood!’ said the Miller; ‘why, that is just what I want for  the roof of my barn.
There is a very large hole in it, and the corn will  all get damp if I don’t stop it up.
How lucky you mentioned it!  It is  quite remarkable how one good action always breeds another.
I have given  you my wheelbarrow, and now you are going to give me your plank.
Of  course, the wheelbarrow is worth far more than the plank, but true,  friendship never notices things like that.
Pray get it at once, and I  will set to work at my barn this very day.’    “‘Certainly,’ cried little Hans, and he ran into the shed and dragged the  plank out.
“‘It is not a very big plank,’ said the Miller, looking at it, ‘and I am  afraid that after I have mended my barn-roof there won’t be any left for  you to mend the wheelbarrow with; but, of course, that is not my fault.
And now, as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I am sure you would like to  give me some flowers in return.
Here is the basket, and mind you fill it  quite full.’    “‘Quite full?’ said little Hans, rather sorrowfully, for it was really a  very big basket, and he knew that if he filled it he would have no  flowers left for the market and he was very anxious to get his silver  buttons back.
“‘Well, really,’ answered the Miller, ‘as I have given you my  wheelbarrow, I don’t think that it is much to ask you for a few flowers.
I may be wrong, but I should have thought that friendship, true  friendship, was quite free from selfishness of any kind.’    “‘My dear friend, my best friend,’ cried little Hans, ‘you are welcome to  all the flowers in my garden.
I would much sooner have your good opinion  than my silver buttons, any day’; and he ran and plucked all his pretty  primroses, and filled the Miller’s basket.
“‘Good-bye, little Hans,’ said the Miller, as he went up the hill with  the plank on his shoulder, and the big basket in his hand.
“‘Good-bye,’ said little Hans, and he began to dig away quite merrily, he  was so pleased about the wheelbarrow.
“The next day he was nailing up some honeysuckle against the porch, when  he heard the Miller’s voice calling to him from the road.
So he jumped  off the ladder, and ran down the garden, and looked over the wall.
“There was the Miller with a large sack of flour on his back.
“‘Dear little Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘would you mind carrying this sack  of flour for me to market?’    “‘Oh, I am so sorry,’ said Hans, ‘but I am really very busy to-day.
I  have got all my creepers to nail up, and all my flowers to water, and all  my grass to roll.’    “‘Well, really,’ said the Miller, ‘I think that, considering that I am  going to give you my wheelbarrow, it is rather unfriendly of you to  refuse.’    “‘Oh, don’t say that,’ cried little Hans, ‘I wouldn’t be unfriendly for  the whole world’; and he ran in for his cap, and trudged off with the big  sack on his shoulders.
“It was a very hot day, and the road was terribly dusty, and before Hans  had reached the sixth milestone he was so tired that he had to sit down  and rest.
However, he went on bravely, and as last he reached the  market.
After he had waited there some time, he sold the sack of flour  for a very good price, and then he returned home at once, for he was  afraid that if he stopped too late he might meet some robbers on the way.
“‘It has certainly been a hard day,’ said little Hans to himself as he  was going to bed, ‘but I am glad I did not refuse the Miller, for he is  my best friend, and, besides, he is going to give me his wheelbarrow.’    “Early the next morning the Miller came down to get the money for his  sack of flour, but little Hans was so tired that he was still in bed.
“‘Upon my word,’ said the Miller, ‘you are very lazy.
Really,  considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, I think you might  work harder.
Idleness is a great sin, and I certainly don’t like any of  my friends to be idle or sluggish.
You must not mind my speaking quite  plainly to you.
Of course I should not dream of doing so if I were not  your friend.
But what is the good of friendship if one cannot say  exactly what one means?
Anybody can say charming things and try to  please and to flatter, but a true friend always says unpleasant things,  and does not mind giving pain.
Indeed, if he is a really true friend he  prefers it, for he knows that then he is doing good.’    “‘I am very sorry,’ said little Hans, rubbing his eyes and pulling off  his night-cap, ‘but I was so tired that I thought I would lie in bed for  a little time, and listen to the birds singing.
Do you know that I  always work better after hearing the birds sing?’    “‘Well, I am glad of that,’ said the Miller, clapping little Hans on the  back, ‘for I want you to come up to the mill as soon as you are dressed,  and mend my barn-roof for me.’    “Poor little Hans was very anxious to go and work in his garden, for his  flowers had not been watered for two days, but he did not like to refuse  the Miller, as he was such a good friend to him.
“‘Do you think it would be unfriendly of me if I said I was busy?’ he  inquired in a shy and timid voice.
“‘Well, really,’ answered the Miller, ‘I do not think it is much to ask  of you, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow; but of  course if you refuse I will go and do it myself.’    “‘Oh! on no account,’ cried little Hans and he jumped out of bed, and  dressed himself, and went up to the barn.
“He worked there all day long, till sunset, and at sunset the Miller came  to see how he was getting on.
“‘Have you mended the hole in the roof yet, little Hans?’ cried the  Miller in a cheery voice.
“‘It is quite mended,’ answered little Hans, coming down the ladder.
“‘Ah!’ said the Miller, ‘there is no work so delightful as the work one  does for others.’    “‘It is certainly a great privilege to hear you talk,’ answered little  Hans, sitting down, and wiping his forehead, ‘a very great privilege.
But I am afraid I shall never have such beautiful ideas as you have.’    “‘Oh! they will come to you,’ said the Miller, ‘but you must take more  pains.
At present you have only the practice of friendship; some day you  will have the theory also.’    “‘Do you really think I shall?’ asked little Hans.
“‘I have no doubt of it,’ answered the Miller, ‘but now that you have  mended the roof, you had better go home and rest, for I want you to drive  my sheep to the mountain to-morrow.’    “Poor little Hans was afraid to say anything to this, and early the next  morning the Miller brought his sheep round to the cottage, and Hans  started off with them to the mountain.
It took him the whole day to get  there and back; and when he returned he was so tired that he went off to  sleep in his chair, and did not wake up till it was broad daylight.
“‘What a delightful time I shall have in my garden,’ he said, and he went  to work at once.
“But somehow he was never able to look after his flowers at all, for his  friend the Miller was always coming round and sending him off on long  errands, or getting him to help at the mill.
Little Hans was very much  distressed at times, as he was afraid his flowers would think he had  forgotten them, but he consoled himself by the reflection that the Miller  was his best friend.
‘Besides,’ he used to say, ‘he is going to give me  his wheelbarrow, and that is an act of pure generosity.’    “So little Hans worked away for the Miller, and the Miller said all kinds  of beautiful things about friendship, which Hans took down in a  note-book, and used to read over at night, for he was a very good  scholar.
“Now it happened that one evening little Hans was sitting by his fireside  when a loud rap came at the door.
It was a very wild night, and the wind  was blowing and roaring round the house so terribly that at first he  thought it was merely the storm.
But a second rap came, and then a  third, louder than any of the others.
“‘It is some poor traveller,’ said little Hans to himself, and he ran to  the door.
“There stood the Miller with a lantern in one hand and a big stick in the  other.
“‘Dear little Hans,’ cried the Miller, ‘I am in great trouble.
My little  boy has fallen off a ladder and hurt himself, and I am going for the  Doctor.
But he lives so far away, and it is such a bad night, that it  has just occurred to me that it would be much better if you went instead  of me.
You know I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, and so, it is  only fair that you should do something for me in return.’    “‘Certainly,’ cried little Hans, ‘I take it quite as a compliment your  coming to me, and I will start off at once.
But you must lend me your  lantern, as the night is so dark that I am afraid I might fall into the  ditch.’    “‘I am very sorry,’ answered the Miller, ‘but it is my new lantern, and  it would be a great loss to me if anything happened to it.’    “‘Well, never mind, I will do without it,’ cried little Hans, and he took  down his great fur coat, and his warm scarlet cap, and tied a muffler  round his throat, and started off.
“What a dreadful storm it was!  The night was so black that little Hans  could hardly see, and the wind was so strong that he could scarcely  stand.
However, he was very courageous, and after he had been walking  about three hours, he arrived at the Doctor’s house, and knocked at the  door.
“‘Who is there?’ cried the Doctor, putting his head out of his bedroom  window.
“‘Little Hans, Doctor.’    “’What do you want, little Hans?’    “‘The Miller’s son has fallen from a ladder, and has hurt himself, and  the Miller wants you to come at once.’    “‘All right!’ said the Doctor; and he ordered his horse, and his big  boots, and his lantern, and came downstairs, and rode off in the  direction of the Miller’s house, little Hans trudging behind him.
“But the storm grew worse and worse, and the rain fell in torrents, and  little Hans could not see where he was going, or keep up with the horse.
At last he lost his way, and wandered off on the moor, which was a very  dangerous place, as it was full of deep holes, and there poor little Hans  was drowned.
His body was found the next day by some goatherds, floating  in a great pool of water, and was brought back by them to the cottage.
“Everybody went to little Hans’ funeral, as he was so popular, and the  Miller was the chief mourner.
“‘As I was his best friend,’ said the Miller, ‘it is only fair that I  should have the best place’; so he walked at the head of the procession  in a long black cloak, and every now and then he wiped his eyes with a  big pocket-handkerchief.
“‘Little Hans is certainly a great loss to every one,’ said the  Blacksmith, when the funeral was over, and they were all seated  comfortably in the inn, drinking spiced wine and eating sweet cakes.
“‘A great loss to me at any rate,’ answered the Miller; ‘why, I had as  good as given him my wheelbarrow, and now I really don’t know what to do  with it.
It is very much in my way at home, and it is in such bad repair  that I could not get anything for it if I sold it.
I will certainly take  care not to give away anything again.
One always suffers for being  generous.’”    “Well?” said the Water-rat, after a long pause.
“Well, that is the end,” said the Linnet.
“But what became of the Miller?” asked the Water-rat.
“Oh!  I really don’t know,” replied the Linnet; “and I am sure that I  don’t care.”    “It is quite evident then that you have no sympathy in your nature,” said  the Water-rat.
“I am afraid you don’t quite see the moral of the story,” remarked the  Linnet.
“The what?” screamed the Water-rat.
“The moral.”    “Do you mean to say that the story has a moral?”    “Certainly,” said the Linnet.
“Well, really,” said the Water-rat, in a very angry manner, “I think you  should have told me that before you began.
If you had done so, I  certainly would not have listened to you; in fact, I should have said  ‘Pooh,’ like the critic.
However, I can say it now”; so he shouted out  “Pooh” at the top of his voice, gave a whisk with his tail, and went back  into his hole.
“And how do you like the Water-rat?” asked the Duck, who came paddling up  some minutes afterwards.
“He has a great many good points, but for my  own part I have a mother’s feelings, and I can never look at a confirmed  bachelor without the tears coming into my eyes.”    “I am rather afraid that I have annoyed him,” answered the Linnet.
“The  fact is, that I told him a story with a moral.”    “Ah! that is always a very dangerous thing to do,” said the Duck.
And I quite agree with her.
The Remarkable Rocket.
THE King’s son was going to be married, so there were general rejoicings.
He had waited a whole year for his bride, and at last she had arrived.
She was a Russian Princess, and had driven all the way from Finland in a  sledge drawn by six reindeer.
The sledge was shaped like a great golden  swan, and between the swan’s wings lay the little Princess herself.
Her  long ermine-cloak reached right down to her feet, on her head was a tiny  cap of silver tissue, and she was as pale as the Snow Palace in which she  had always lived.
So pale was she that as she drove through the streets  all the people wondered.
“She is like a white rose!” they cried, and  they threw down flowers on her from the balconies.
At the gate of the Castle the Prince was waiting to receive her.
He had  dreamy violet eyes, and his hair was like fine gold.
When he saw her he  sank upon one knee, and kissed her hand.
“Your picture was beautiful,” he murmured, “but you are more beautiful  than your picture”; and the little Princess blushed.
“She was like a white rose before,” said a young Page to his neighbour,  “but she is like a red rose now”; and the whole Court was delighted.
For the next three days everybody went about saying, “White rose, Red  rose, Red rose, White rose”; and the King gave orders that the Page’s  salary was to be doubled.
As he received no salary at all this was not  of much use to him, but it was considered a great honour, and was duly  published in the Court Gazette.
When the three days were over the marriage was celebrated.
It was a  magnificent ceremony, and the bride and bridegroom walked hand in hand  under a canopy of purple velvet embroidered with little pearls.
Then  there was a State Banquet, which lasted for five hours.
The Prince and  Princess sat at the top of the Great Hall and drank out of a cup of clear  crystal.
Only true lovers could drink out of this cup, for if false lips  touched it, it grew grey and dull and cloudy.
“It’s quite clear that they love each other,” said the little Page, “as  clear as crystal!” and the King doubled his salary a second time.
“What  an honour!” cried all the courtiers.
After the banquet there was to be a Ball.
The bride and bridegroom were  to dance the Rose-dance together, and the King had promised to play the  flute.
He played very badly, but no one had ever dared to tell him so,  because he was the King.
Indeed, he knew only two airs, and was never  quite certain which one he was playing; but it made no matter, for,  whatever he did, everybody cried out, “Charming! charming!”    The last item on the programme was a grand display of fireworks, to be  let off exactly at midnight.
The little Princess had never seen a  firework in her life, so the King had given orders that the Royal  Pyrotechnist should be in attendance on the day of her marriage.
“What are fireworks like?” she had asked the Prince, one morning, as she  was walking on the terrace.
“They are like the Aurora Borealis,” said the King, who always answered  questions that were addressed to other people, “only much more natural.
I prefer them to stars myself, as you always know when they are going to  appear, and they are as delightful as my own flute-playing.
You must  certainly see them.”    So at the end of the King’s garden a great stand had been set up, and as  soon as the Royal Pyrotechnist had put everything in its proper place,  the fireworks began to talk to each other.
“The world is certainly very beautiful,” cried a little Squib.
“Just  look at those yellow tulips.
Why! if they were real crackers they could  not be lovelier.
I am very glad I have travelled.
Travel improves the  mind wonderfully, and does away with all one’s prejudices.”    “The King’s garden is not the world, you foolish squib,” said a big Roman  Candle; “the world is an enormous place, and it would take you three days  to see it thoroughly.”    “Any place you love is the world to you,” exclaimed a pensive Catherine  Wheel, who had been attached to an old deal box in early life, and prided  herself on her broken heart; “but love is not fashionable any more, the  poets have killed it.
They wrote so much about it that nobody believed  them, and I am not surprised.
True love suffers, and is silent.
I  remember myself once—But it is no matter now.
Romance is a thing of the  past.”    “Nonsense!” said the Roman Candle, “Romance never dies.
It is like the  moon, and lives for ever.
The bride and bridegroom, for instance, love  each other very dearly.
I heard all about them this morning from a  brown-paper cartridge, who happened to be staying in the same drawer as  myself, and knew the latest Court news.”    But the Catherine Wheel shook her head.
“Romance is dead, Romance is  dead, Romance is dead,” she murmured.
She was one of those people who  think that, if you say the same thing over and over a great many times,  it becomes true in the end.
Suddenly, a sharp, dry cough was heard, and they all looked round.
It came from a tall, supercilious-looking Rocket, who was tied to the end  of a long stick.
He always coughed before he made any observation, so as  to attract attention.
“Ahem! ahem!” he said, and everybody listened except the poor Catherine  Wheel, who was still shaking her head, and murmuring, “Romance is dead.”    “Order! order!” cried out a Cracker.
He was something of a politician,  and had always taken a prominent part in the local elections, so he knew  the proper Parliamentary expressions to use.
“Quite dead,” whispered the Catherine Wheel, and she went off to sleep.
As soon as there was perfect silence, the Rocket coughed a third time and  began.
He spoke with a very slow, distinct voice, as if he was dictating  his memoirs, and always looked over the shoulder of the person to whom he  was talking.
In fact, he had a most distinguished manner.
“How fortunate it is for the King’s son,” he remarked, “that he is to be  married on the very day on which I am to be let off.
Really, if it had  been arranged beforehand, it could not have turned out better for him;  but, Princes are always lucky.”    “Dear me!” said the little Squib, “I thought it was quite the other way,  and that we were to be let off in the Prince’s honour.”    “It may be so with you,” he answered; “indeed, I have no doubt that it  is, but with me it is different.
I am a very remarkable Rocket, and come  of remarkable parents.
My mother was the most celebrated Catherine Wheel  of her day, and was renowned for her graceful dancing.
When she made her  great public appearance she spun round nineteen times before she went  out, and each time that she did so she threw into the air seven pink  stars.
She was three feet and a half in diameter, and made of the very  best gunpowder.
My father was a Rocket like myself, and of French  extraction.
He flew so high that the people were afraid that he would  never come down again.
He did, though, for he was of a kindly  disposition, and he made a most brilliant descent in a shower of golden  rain.
The newspapers wrote about his performance in very flattering  terms.
Indeed, the Court Gazette called him a triumph of Pylotechnic  art.”    “Pyrotechnic, Pyrotechnic, you mean,” said a Bengal Light; “I know it is  Pyrotechnic, for I saw it written on my own canister.”    “Well, I said Pylotechnic,” answered the Rocket, in a severe tone of  voice, and the Bengal Light felt so crushed that he began at once to  bully the little squibs, in order to show that he was still a person of  some importance.
“I was saying,” continued the Rocket, “I was saying—What was I saying?”    “You were talking about yourself,” replied the Roman Candle.
“Of course; I knew I was discussing some interesting subject when I was  so rudely interrupted.
I hate rudeness and bad manners of every kind,  for I am extremely sensitive.
No one in the whole world is so sensitive  as I am, I am quite sure of that.”    “What is a sensitive person?” said the Cracker to the Roman Candle.
“A person who, because he has corns himself, always treads on other  people’s toes,” answered the Roman Candle in a low whisper; and the  Cracker nearly exploded with laughter.
“Pray, what are you laughing at?” inquired the Rocket; “I am not  laughing.”    “I am laughing because I am happy,” replied the Cracker.
“That is a very selfish reason,” said the Rocket angrily.
“What right  have you to be happy?
You should be thinking about others.
In fact, you  should be thinking about me.
I am always thinking about myself, and I  expect everybody else to do the same.
That is what is called sympathy.
It is a beautiful virtue, and I possess it in a high degree.
Suppose,  for instance, anything happened to me to-night, what a misfortune that  would be for every one!  The Prince and Princess would never be happy  again, their whole married life would be spoiled; and as for the King, I  know he would not get over it.
Really, when I begin to reflect on the  importance of my position, I am almost moved to tears.”    “If you want to give pleasure to others,” cried the Roman Candle, “you  had better keep yourself dry.”    “Certainly,” exclaimed the Bengal Light, who was now in better spirits;  “that is only common sense.”    “Common sense, indeed!” said the Rocket indignantly; “you forget that I  am very uncommon, and very remarkable.
Why, anybody can have common  sense, provided that they have no imagination.
But I have imagination,  for I never think of things as they really are; I always think of them as  being quite different.
As for keeping myself dry, there is evidently no  one here who can at all appreciate an emotional nature.
Fortunately for  myself, I don’t care.
The only thing that sustains one through life is  the consciousness of the immense inferiority of everybody else, and this  is a feeling that I have always cultivated.
But none of you have any  hearts.
Here you are laughing and making merry just as if the Prince and  Princess had not just been married.”    “Well, really,” exclaimed a small Fire-balloon, “why not?
It is a most  joyful occasion, and when I soar up into the air I intend to tell the  stars all about it.
You will see them twinkle when I talk to them about  the pretty bride.”    “Ah! what a trivial view of life!” said the Rocket; “but it is only what  I expected.
There is nothing in you; you are hollow and empty.
Why,  perhaps the Prince and Princess may go to live in a country where there  is a deep river, and perhaps they may have one only son, a little  fair-haired boy with violet eyes like the Prince himself; and perhaps  some day he may go out to walk with his nurse; and perhaps the nurse may  go to sleep under a great elder-tree; and perhaps the little boy may fall  into the deep river and be drowned.
What a terrible misfortune!  Poor  people, to lose their only son!  It is really too dreadful!  I shall  never get over it.”    “But they have not lost their only son,” said the Roman Candle; “no  misfortune has happened to them at all.”    “I never said that they had,” replied the Rocket; “I said that they  might.
If they had lost their only son there would be no use in saying  anything more about the matter.
I hate people who cry over spilt milk.
But when I think that they might lose their only son, I certainly am very  much affected.”    “You certainly are!” cried the Bengal Light.
“In fact, you are the most  affected person I ever met.”    “You are the rudest person I ever met,” said the Rocket, “and you cannot  understand my friendship for the Prince.”    “Why, you don’t even know him,” growled the Roman Candle.
“I never said I knew him,” answered the Rocket.
“I dare say that if I  knew him I should not be his friend at all.
It is a very dangerous thing  to know one’s friends.”    “You had really better keep yourself dry,” said the Fire-balloon.
“That  is the important thing.”    “Very important for you, I have no doubt,” answered the Rocket, “but I  shall weep if I choose”; and he actually burst into real tears, which  flowed down his stick like rain-drops, and nearly drowned two little  beetles, who were just thinking of setting up house together, and were  looking for a nice dry spot to live in.
“He must have a truly romantic nature,” said the Catherine Wheel, “for he  weeps when there is nothing at all to weep about”; and she heaved a deep  sigh, and thought about the deal box.
But the Roman Candle and the Bengal Light were quite indignant, and kept  saying, “Humbug! humbug!” at the top of their voices.
They were  extremely practical, and whenever they objected to anything they called  it humbug.
Then the moon rose like a wonderful silver shield; and the stars began to  shine, and a sound of music came from the palace.
The Prince and Princess were leading the dance.
They danced so  beautifully that the tall white lilies peeped in at the window and  watched them, and the great red poppies nodded their heads and beat time.
Then ten o’clock struck, and then eleven, and then twelve, and at the  last stroke of midnight every one came out on the terrace, and the King  sent for the Royal Pyrotechnist.
“Let the fireworks begin,” said the King; and the Royal Pyrotechnist made  a low bow, and marched down to the end of the garden.
He had six  attendants with him, each of whom carried a lighted torch at the end of a  long pole.
It was certainly a magnificent display.
Whizz! Whizz! went the Catherine Wheel, as she spun round and round.
Boom!  Boom! went the Roman Candle.
Then the Squibs danced all over the  place, and the Bengal Lights made everything look scarlet.
“Good-bye,”  cried the Fire-balloon, as he soared away, dropping tiny blue sparks.
Bang! Bang! answered the Crackers, who were enjoying themselves  immensely.
Every one was a great success except the Remarkable Rocket.
He was so damp with crying that he could not go off at all.
The best  thing in him was the gunpowder, and that was so wet with tears that it  was of no use.
All his poor relations, to whom he would never speak,  except with a sneer, shot up into the sky like wonderful golden flowers  with blossoms of fire.
Huzza! Huzza! cried the Court; and the little  Princess laughed with pleasure.
“I suppose they are reserving me for some grand occasion,” said the  Rocket; “no doubt that is what it means,” and he looked more supercilious  than ever.
The next day the workmen came to put everything tidy.
“This is evidently  a deputation,” said the Rocket; “I will receive them with becoming  dignity” so he put his nose in the air, and began to frown severely as if  he were thinking about some very important subject.
But they took no  notice of him at all till they were just going away.
Then one of them  caught sight of him.
“Hallo!” he cried, “what a bad rocket!” and he  threw him over the wall into the ditch.
“BAD Rocket?
BAD Rocket?” he said, as he whirled through the air;  “impossible!  GRAND Rocket, that is what the man said.
BAD and GRAND  sound very much the same, indeed they often are the same”; and he fell  into the mud.
“It is not comfortable here,” he remarked, “but no doubt it is some  fashionable watering-place, and they have sent me away to recruit my  health.
My nerves are certainly very much shattered, and I require  rest.”    Then a little Frog, with bright jewelled eyes, and a green mottled coat,  swam up to him.
“A new arrival, I see!” said the Frog.
“Well, after all there is nothing  like mud.
Give me rainy weather and a ditch, and I am quite happy.
Do  you think it will be a wet afternoon?
I am sure I hope so, but the sky  is quite blue and cloudless.
What a pity!”    “Ahem! ahem!” said the Rocket, and he began to cough.
“What a delightful voice you have!” cried the Frog.
“Really it is quite  like a croak, and croaking is of course the most musical sound in the  world.
You will hear our glee-club this evening.
We sit in the old duck  pond close by the farmer’s house, and as soon as the moon rises we begin.
It is so entrancing that everybody lies awake to listen to us.
In fact,  it was only yesterday that I heard the farmer’s wife say to her mother  that she could not get a wink of sleep at night on account of us.
It is  most gratifying to find oneself so popular.”    “Ahem! ahem!” said the Rocket angrily.
He was very much annoyed that he  could not get a word in.
“A delightful voice, certainly,” continued the Frog; “I hope you will  come over to the duck-pond.
I am off to look for my daughters.
I have  six beautiful daughters, and I am so afraid the Pike may meet them.
He  is a perfect monster, and would have no hesitation in breakfasting off  them.
Well, good-bye: I have enjoyed our conversation very much, I  assure you.”    “Conversation, indeed!” said the Rocket.
“You have talked the whole time  yourself.
That is not conversation.”    “Somebody must listen,” answered the Frog, “and I like to do all the  talking myself.
It saves time, and prevents arguments.”    “But I like arguments,” said the Rocket.
“I hope not,” said the Frog complacently.
“Arguments are extremely  vulgar, for everybody in good society holds exactly the same opinions.
Good-bye a second time; I see my daughters in the distance and the little  Frog swam away.
“You are a very irritating person,” said the Rocket, “and very ill-bred.
I hate people who talk about themselves, as you do, when one wants to  talk about oneself, as I do.
It is what I call selfishness, and  selfishness is a most detestable thing, especially to any one of my  temperament, for I am well known for my sympathetic nature.
In fact, you  should take example by me; you could not possibly have a better model.
Now that you have the chance you had better avail yourself of it, for I  am going back to Court almost immediately.
I am a great favourite at  Court; in fact, the Prince and Princess were married yesterday in my  honour.
Of course you know nothing of these matters, for you are a  provincial.”    “There is no good talking to him,” said a Dragon-fly, who was sitting on  the top of a large brown bulrush; “no good at all, for he has gone away.”    “Well, that is his loss, not mine,” answered the Rocket.
“I am not going  to stop talking to him merely because he pays no attention.
I like  hearing myself talk.
It is one of my greatest pleasures.
I often have  long conversations all by myself, and I am so clever that sometimes I  don’t understand a single word of what I am saying.”    “Then you should certainly lecture on Philosophy,” said the Dragon-fly;  and he spread a pair of lovely gauze wings and soared away into the sky.
“How very silly of him not to stay here!” said the Rocket.
“I am sure  that he has not often got such a chance of improving his mind.
However,  I don’t care a bit.
Genius like mine is sure to be appreciated some  day”; and he sank down a little deeper into the mud.
After some time a large White Duck swam up to him.
She had yellow legs,  and webbed feet, and was considered a great beauty on account of her  waddle.
“Quack, quack, quack,” she said.
“What a curious shape you are!  May I  ask were you born like that, or is it the result of an accident?”    “It is quite evident that you have always lived in the country,” answered  the Rocket, “otherwise you would know who I am.
However, I excuse your  ignorance.
It would be unfair to expect other people to be as remarkable  as oneself.
You will no doubt be surprised to hear that I can fly up  into the sky, and come down in a shower of golden rain.”    “I don’t think much of that,” said the Duck, “as I cannot see what use it  is to any one.
Now, if you could plough the fields like the ox, or draw  a cart like the horse, or look after the sheep like the collie-dog, that  would be something.”    “My good creature,” cried the Rocket in a very haughty tone of voice, “I  see that you belong to the lower orders.
A person of my position is  never useful.
We have certain accomplishments, and that is more than  sufficient.
I have no sympathy myself with industry of any kind, least  of all with such industries as you seem to recommend.
Indeed, I have  always been of opinion that hard work is simply the refuge of people who  have nothing whatever to do.”    “Well, well,” said the Duck, who was of a very peaceable disposition, and  never quarrelled with any one, “everybody has different tastes.
I hope,  at any rate, that you are going to take up your residence here.”    “Oh! dear no,” cried the Rocket.
“I am merely a visitor, a distinguished  visitor.
The fact is that I find this place rather tedious.
There is  neither society here, nor solitude.
In fact, it is essentially suburban.
I shall probably go back to Court, for I know that I am destined to make  a sensation in the world.”    “I had thoughts of entering public life once myself,” remarked the Duck;  “there are so many things that need reforming.
Indeed, I took the chair  at a meeting some time ago, and we passed resolutions condemning  everything that we did not like.
However, they did not seem to have much  effect.
Now I go in for domesticity, and look after my family.”    “I am made for public life,” said the Rocket, “and so are all my  relations, even the humblest of them.
Whenever we appear we excite great  attention.
I have not actually appeared myself, but when I do so it will  be a magnificent sight.
As for domesticity, it ages one rapidly, and  distracts one’s mind from higher things.”    “Ah! the higher things of life, how fine they are!” said the Duck; “and  that reminds me how hungry I feel”: and she swam away down the stream,  saying, “Quack, quack, quack.”    “Come back! come back!” screamed the Rocket, “I have a great deal to say  to you”; but the Duck paid no attention to him.
“I am glad that she has  gone,” he said to himself, “she has a decidedly middle-class mind”; and  he sank a little deeper still into the mud, and began to think about the  loneliness of genius, when suddenly two little boys in white smocks came  running down the bank, with a kettle and some faggots.
“This must be the deputation,” said the Rocket, and he tried to look very  dignified.
“Hallo!” cried one of the boys, “look at this old stick!  I wonder how it  came here”; and he picked the rocket out of the ditch.
“OLD Stick!” said the Rocket, “impossible!  GOLD Stick, that is what he  said.
Gold Stick is very complimentary.
In fact, he mistakes me for one  of the Court dignitaries!”    “Let us put it into the fire!” said the other boy, “it will help to boil  the kettle.”    So they piled the faggots together, and put the Rocket on top, and lit  the fire.
“This is magnificent,” cried the Rocket, “they are going to let me off in  broad day-light, so that every one can see me.”    “We will go to sleep now,” they said, “and when we wake up the kettle  will be boiled”; and they lay down on the grass, and shut their eyes.
The Rocket was very damp, so he took a long time to burn.
At last,  however, the fire caught him.
“Now I am going off!” he cried, and he made himself very stiff and  straight.
“I know I shall go much higher than the stars, much higher  than the moon, much higher than the sun.
In fact, I shall go so high  that—”    Fizz! Fizz! Fizz! and he went straight up into the air.
“Delightful!” he cried, “I shall go on like this for ever.
What a  success I am!”    But nobody saw him.
Then he began to feel a curious tingling sensation all over him.
“Now I am going to explode,” he cried.
“I shall set the whole world on  fire, and make such a noise that nobody will talk about anything else for  a whole year.”  And he certainly did explode.
Bang! Bang! Bang! went the  gunpowder.
There was no doubt about it.
But nobody heard him, not even the two little boys, for they were sound  asleep.
Then all that was left of him was the stick, and this fell down on the  back of a Goose who was taking a walk by the side of the ditch.
“Good heavens!” cried the Goose.
“It is going to rain sticks”; and she  rushed into the water.
“I knew I should create a great sensation,” gasped the Rocket, and he  went out.The artist is the creator of beautiful things.
To reveal art and conceal the artist is art's aim.
The critic is he who can translate into another manner or a new material his impression of beautiful things.
The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography.
Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without being charming.
This is a fault.
Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the cultivated.
For these there is hope.
They are the elect to whom beautiful things mean only beauty.
There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book.
Books are well written, or badly written.
That is all.
The nineteenth century dislike of realism is the rage of Caliban seeing his own face in a glass.
The nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban not seeing his own face in a glass.
The moral life of man forms part of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect medium.
No artist desires to prove anything.
Even things that are true can be proved.
No artist has ethical sympathies.
An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style.
No artist is ever morbid.
The artist can express everything.
Thought and language are to the artist instruments of an art.
Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art.
From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is the art of the musician.
From the point of view of feeling, the actor's craft is the type.
All art is at once surface and symbol.
Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril.
Those who read the symbol do so at their peril.
It is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors.
Diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the work is new, complex, and vital.
When critics disagree, the artist is in accord with himself.
We can forgive a man for making a useful thing as long as he does not admire it.
The only excuse for making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.
All art is quite useless.
The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.
From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion.
The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine, seemed to make the stillness more oppressive.
The dim roar of London was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.
In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty, and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many strange conjectures.
As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his face, and seemed about to linger there.
But he suddenly started up, and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake.
"It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done," said Lord Henry languidly.
"You must certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor.
The Academy is too large and too vulgar.
Whenever I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people, which was worse.
The Grosvenor is really the only place."  "I don't think I shall send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at Oxford.
"No, I won't send it anywhere."  Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette.
"Not send it anywhere?
My dear fellow, why?
Have you any reason?
What odd chaps you painters are!  You do anything in the world to gain a reputation.
As soon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away.
It is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about.
A portrait like this would set you far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion."  "I know you will laugh at me," he replied, "but I really can't exhibit it.
I have put too much of myself into it."  Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.
"Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same."  "Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you were so vain; and I really can't see any resemblance between you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves.
Why, my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you--well, of course you have an intellectual expression and all that.
But beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins.
Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.
The moment one sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something horrid.
Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.
How perfectly hideous they are!  Except, of course, in the Church.
But then in the Church they don't think.
A bishop keeps on saying at the age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen, and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful.
Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks.
I feel quite sure of that.
He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence.
Don't flatter yourself, Basil:  you are not in the least like him."  "You don't understand me, Harry," answered the artist.
"Of course I am not like him.
I know that perfectly well.
Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him.
You shrug your shoulders?
I am telling you the truth.
There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings.
It is better not to be different from one's fellows.
The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world.
They can sit at their ease and gape at the play.
If they know nothing of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat.
They live as we all should live--undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet.
They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it from alien hands.
Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are--my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray's good looks--we shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly."  "Dorian Gray?
Is that his name?" asked Lord Henry, walking across the studio towards Basil Hallward.
"Yes, that is his name.
I didn't intend to tell it to you."  "But why not?"  "Oh, I can't explain.
When I like people immensely, I never tell their names to any one.
It is like surrendering a part of them.
I have grown to love secrecy.
It seems to be the one thing that can make modern life mysterious or marvellous to us.
The commonest thing is delightful if one only hides it.
When I leave town now I never tell my people where I am going.
If I did, I would lose all my pleasure.
It is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into one's life.
I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?"  "Not at all," answered Lord Henry, "not at all, my dear Basil.
You seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties.
I never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing.
When we meet--we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go down to the Duke's--we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces.
My wife is very good at it--much better, in fact, than I am.
She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do.
But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all.
I sometimes wish she would; but she merely laughs at me."  "I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry," said Basil Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden.
"I believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues.
You are an extraordinary fellow.
You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing.
Your cynicism is simply a pose."  "Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know," cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush.
The sunlight slipped over the polished leaves.
In the grass, white daisies were tremulous.
After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch.
"I am afraid I must be going, Basil," he murmured, "and before I go, I insist on your answering a question I put to you some time ago."  "What is that?" said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.
"You know quite well."  "I do not, Harry."  "Well, I will tell you what it is.
I want you to explain to me why you won't exhibit Dorian Gray's picture.
I want the real reason."  "I told you the real reason."  "No, you did not.
You said it was because there was too much of yourself in it.
Now, that is childish."  "Harry," said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter.
The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion.
It is not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on the coloured canvas, reveals himself.
The reason I will not exhibit this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of my own soul."  Lord Henry laughed.
"And what is that?" he asked.
"I will tell you," said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity came over his face.
"I am all expectation, Basil," continued his companion, glancing at him.
"Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry," answered the painter; "and I am afraid you will hardly understand it.
Perhaps you will hardly believe it."  Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from the grass and examined it.
"I am quite sure I shall understand it," he replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk, "and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it is quite incredible."  The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid air.
A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze wings.
Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward's heart beating, and wondered what was coming.
"The story is simply this," said the painter after some time.
"Two months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon's.
You know we poor artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages.
With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized.
Well, after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at me.
I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.
When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale.
A curious sensation of terror came over me.
I knew that I had come face to face with some one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself.
I did not want any external influence in my life.
You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature.
I have always been my own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray.
Then--but I don't know how to explain it to you.
Something seemed to tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life.
I had a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows.
I grew afraid and turned to quit the room.
It was not conscience that made me do so:  it was a sort of cowardice.
I take no credit to myself for trying to escape."  "Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil.
Conscience is the trade-name of the firm.
That is all."  "I don't believe that, Harry, and I don't believe you do either.
However, whatever was my motive--and it may have been pride, for I used to be very proud--I certainly struggled to the door.
There, of course, I stumbled against Lady Brandon.
'You are not going to run away so soon, Mr. Hallward?' she screamed out.
You know her curiously shrill voice?"  "Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said Lord Henry, pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.
"I could not get rid of her.
She brought me up to royalties, and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras and parrot noses.
She spoke of me as her dearest friend.
I had only met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.
I believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortality.
Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely stirred me.
We were quite close, almost touching.
Our eyes met again.
It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.
Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all.
It was simply inevitable.
We would have spoken to each other without any introduction.
I am sure of that.
Dorian told me so afterwards.
He, too, felt that we were destined to know each other."  "And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?" asked his companion.
"I know she goes in for giving a rapid _precis_ of all her guests.
I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to everybody in the room, the most astounding details.
I simply fled.
I like to find out people for myself.
But Lady Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.
She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants to know."  "Poor Lady Brandon!  You are hard on her, Harry!" said Hallward listlessly.
"My dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only succeeded in opening a restaurant.
How could I admire her?
But tell me, what did she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?"  "Oh, something like, 'Charming boy--poor dear mother and I absolutely inseparable.
Quite forget what he does--afraid he--doesn't do anything--oh, yes, plays the piano--or is it the violin, dear Mr. Gray?'  Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at once."  "Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far the best ending for one," said the young lord, plucking another daisy.
Hallward shook his head.
"You don't understand what friendship is, Harry," he murmured--"or what enmity is, for that matter.
You like every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one."  "How horribly unjust of you!" cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the summer sky.
"Yes; horribly unjust of you.
I make a great difference between people.
I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects.
A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies.
I have not got one who is a fool.
They are all men of some intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me.
Is that very vain of me?
I think it is rather vain."  "I should think it was, Harry.
But according to your category I must be merely an acquaintance."  "My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance."  "And much less than a friend.
A sort of brother, I suppose?"  "Oh, brothers!  I don't care for brothers.
My elder brother won't die, and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else."  "Harry!" exclaimed Hallward, frowning.
"My dear fellow, I am not quite serious.
But I can't help detesting my relations.
I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand other people having the same faults as ourselves.
I quite sympathize with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices of the upper orders.
The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves.
When poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite magnificent.
And yet I don't suppose that ten per cent of the proletariat live correctly."  "I don't agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is more, Harry, I feel sure you don't either."  Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane.
"How English you are Basil!  That is the second time you have made that observation.
If one puts forward an idea to a true Englishman--always a rash thing to do--he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong.
The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes it oneself.
Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do with the sincerity of the man who expresses it.
Indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices.
However, I don't propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you.
I like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no principles better than anything else in the world.
Tell me more about Mr. Dorian Gray.
How often do you see him?"  "Every day.
I couldn't be happy if I didn't see him every day.
He is absolutely necessary to me."  "How extraordinary!  I thought you would never care for anything but your art."  "He is all my art to me now," said the painter gravely.
"I sometimes think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the world's history.
The first is the appearance of a new medium for art, and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also.
What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will some day be to me.
It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him, sketch from him.
Of course, I have done all that.
But he is much more to me than a model or a sitter.
I won't tell you that I am dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such that art cannot express it.
There is nothing that art cannot express, and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good work, is the best work of my life.
But in some curious way--I wonder will you understand me?--his personality has suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style.
I see things differently, I think of them differently.
I can now recreate life in a way that was hidden from me before.
'A dream of form in days of thought'--who is it who says that?
I forget; but it is what Dorian Gray has been to me.
The merely visible presence of this lad--for he seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty--his merely visible presence--ah!  I wonder can you realize all that that means?
Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek.
The harmony of soul and body--how much that is!  We in our madness have separated the two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is void.
Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me!  You remember that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price but which I would not part with?
It is one of the best things I have ever done.
And why is it so?
Because, while I was painting it, Dorian Gray sat beside me.
Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I had always looked for and always missed."  "Basil, this is extraordinary!  I must see Dorian Gray."  Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden.
After some time he came back.
"Harry," he said, "Dorian Gray is to me simply a motive in art.
You might see nothing in him.
I see everything in him.
He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is there.
He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner.
I find him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of certain colours.
That is all."  "Then why won't you exhibit his portrait?" asked Lord Henry.
"Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never cared to speak to him.
He knows nothing about it.
He shall never know anything about it.
But the world might guess it, and I will not bare my soul to their shallow prying eyes.
My heart shall never be put under their microscope.
There is too much of myself in the thing, Harry--too much of myself!"  "Poets are not so scrupulous as you are.
They know how useful passion is for publication.
Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions."  "I hate them for it," cried Hallward.
"An artist should create beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them.
We live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography.
We have lost the abstract sense of beauty.
Some day I will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray."  "I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won't argue with you.
It is only the intellectually lost who ever argue.
Tell me, is Dorian Gray very fond of you?"  The painter considered for a few moments.
"He likes me," he answered after a pause; "I know he likes me.
Of course I flatter him dreadfully.
I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I know I shall be sorry for having said.
As a rule, he is charming to me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things.
Now and then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight in giving me pain.
Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a summer's day."  "Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger," murmured Lord Henry.
"Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will.
It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty.
That accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves.
In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place.
The thoroughly well-informed man--that is the modern ideal.
And the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing.
It is like a _bric-a-brac_ shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above its proper value.
I think you will tire first, all the same.
Some day you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of colour, or something.
You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you.
The next time he calls, you will be perfectly cold and indifferent.
It will be a great pity, for it will alter you.
What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind is that it leaves one so unromantic."  "Harry, don't talk like that.
As long as I live, the personality of Dorian Gray will dominate me.
You can't feel what I feel.
You change too often."  "Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it.
Those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who know love's tragedies."  And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase.
There was a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like swallows.
How pleasant it was in the garden!  And how delightful other people's emotions were!--much more delightful than their ideas, it seemed to him.
One's own soul, and the passions of one's friends--those were the fascinating things in life.
He pictured to himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed by staying so long with Basil Hallward.
Had he gone to his aunt's, he would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the necessity for model lodging-houses.
Each class would have preached the importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity in their own lives.
The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift, and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour.
It was charming to have escaped all that!  As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike him.
He turned to Hallward and said, "My dear fellow, I have just remembered."  "Remembered what, Harry?"  "Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray."  "Where was it?" asked Hallward, with a slight frown.
"Don't look so angry, Basil.
It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha's.
She told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray.
I am bound to state that she never told me he was good-looking.
Women have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not.
She said that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature.
I at once pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet.
I wish I had known it was your friend."  "I am very glad you didn't, Harry."  "Why?"  "I don't want you to meet him."  "You don't want me to meet him?"  "No."  "Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, coming into the garden.
"You must introduce me now," cried Lord Henry, laughing.
The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight.
"Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker:  I shall be in in a few moments." The man bowed and went up the walk.
Then he looked at Lord Henry.
"Dorian Gray is my dearest friend," he said.
"He has a simple and a beautiful nature.
Your aunt was quite right in what she said of him.
Don't spoil him.
Don't try to influence him.
Your influence would be bad.
The world is wide, and has many marvellous people in it.
Don't take away from me the one person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses:  my life as an artist depends on him.
Mind, Harry, I trust you."  He spoke very slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.
"What nonsense you talk!" said Lord Henry, smiling, and taking Hallward by the arm, he almost led him into the house.
As they entered they saw Dorian Gray.
He was seated at the piano, with his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann's "Forest Scenes."  "You must lend me these, Basil," he cried.
"I want to learn them.
They are perfectly charming."  "That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian."  "Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don't want a life-sized portrait of myself," answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a wilful, petulant manner.
When he caught sight of Lord Henry, a faint blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up.
"I beg your pardon, Basil, but I didn't know you had any one with you."  "This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine.
I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you have spoiled everything."  "You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray," said Lord Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand.
"My aunt has often spoken to me about you.
You are one of her favourites, and, I am afraid, one of her victims also."  "I am in Lady Agatha's black books at present," answered Dorian with a funny look of penitence.
"I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it.
We were to have played a duet together--three duets, I believe.
I don't know what she will say to me.
I am far too frightened to call."  "Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt.
She is quite devoted to you.
And I don't think it really matters about your not being there.
The audience probably thought it was a duet.
When Aunt Agatha sits down to the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people."  "That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me," answered Dorian, laughing.
Lord Henry looked at him.
Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome, with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp gold hair.
There was something in his face that made one trust him at once.
All the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth's passionate purity.
One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from the world.
No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.
"You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. Gray--far too charming." And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened his cigarette-case.
The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes ready.
He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry's last remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said, "Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day.
Would you think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?"  Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray.
"Am I to go, Mr. Gray?" he asked.
"Oh, please don't, Lord Henry.
I see that Basil is in one of his sulky moods, and I can't bear him when he sulks.
Besides, I want you to tell me why I should not go in for philanthropy."  "I don't know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray.
It is so tedious a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it.
But I certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop.
You don't really mind, Basil, do you?
You have often told me that you liked your sitters to have some one to chat to."  Hallward bit his lip.
"If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay.
Dorian's whims are laws to everybody, except himself."  Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves.
"You are very pressing, Basil, but I am afraid I must go.
I have promised to meet a man at the Orleans.
Good-bye, Mr. Gray.
Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon Street.
I am nearly always at home at five o'clock.
Write to me when you are coming.
I should be sorry to miss you."  "Basil," cried Dorian Gray, "if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go, too.
You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant.
Ask him to stay.
I insist upon it."  "Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me," said Hallward, gazing intently at his picture.
"It is quite true, I never talk when I am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious for my unfortunate sitters.
I beg you to stay."  "But what about my man at the Orleans?"  The painter laughed.
"I don't think there will be any difficulty about that.
Sit down again, Harry.
And now, Dorian, get up on the platform, and don't move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry says.
He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the single exception of myself."  Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek martyr, and made a little _moue_ of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he had rather taken a fancy.
He was so unlike Basil.
They made a delightful contrast.
And he had such a beautiful voice.
After a few moments he said to him, "Have you really a very bad influence, Lord Henry?
As bad as Basil says?"  "There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray.
All influence is immoral--immoral from the scientific point of view."  "Why?"  "Because to influence a person is to give him one's own soul.
He does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions.
His virtues are not real to him.
His sins, if there are such things as sins, are borrowed.
He becomes an echo of some one else's music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him.
The aim of life is self-development.
To realize one's nature perfectly--that is what each of us is here for.
People are afraid of themselves, nowadays.
They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to one's self.
Of course, they are charitable.
They feed the hungry and clothe the beggar.
But their own souls starve, and are naked.
Courage has gone out of our race.
Perhaps we never really had it.
The terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret of religion--these are the two things that govern us.
And yet--"  "Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good boy," said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look had come into the lad's face that he had never seen there before.
"And yet," continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of him, and that he had even in his Eton days, "I believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream--I believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of mediaevalism, and return to the Hellenic ideal--to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it may be.
But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself.
The mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial that mars our lives.
We are punished for our refusals.
Every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us.
The body sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of purification.
Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret.
The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it.
Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful.
It has been said that the great events of the world take place in the brain.
It is in the brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place also.
You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame--"  "Stop!" faltered Dorian Gray, "stop! you bewilder me.
I don't know what to say.
There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it.
Don't speak.
Let me think.
Or, rather, let me try not to think."  For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and eyes strangely bright.
He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh influences were at work within him.
Yet they seemed to him to have come really from himself.
The few words that Basil's friend had said to him--words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in them--had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before, but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.
Music had stirred him like that.
Music had troubled him many times.
But music was not articulate.
It was not a new world, but rather another chaos, that it created in us.
Words!  Mere words!  How terrible they were!  How clear, and vivid, and cruel!  One could not escape from them.
And yet what a subtle magic there was in them!  They seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute.
Mere words!  Was there anything so real as words?
Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood.
He understood them now.
Life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him.
It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire.
Why had he not known it?
With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him.
He knew the precise psychological moment when to say nothing.
He felt intensely interested.
He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen, a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience.
He had merely shot an arrow into the air.
Had it hit the mark?
How fascinating the lad was!  Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes only from strength.
He was unconscious of the silence.
"Basil, I am tired of standing," cried Dorian Gray suddenly.
"I must go out and sit in the garden.
The air is stifling here."  "My dear fellow, I am so sorry.
When I am painting, I can't think of anything else.
But you never sat better.
You were perfectly still.
And I have caught the effect I wanted--the half-parted lips and the bright look in the eyes.
I don't know what Harry has been saying to you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression.
I suppose he has been paying you compliments.
You mustn't believe a word that he says."  "He has certainly not been paying me compliments.
Perhaps that is the reason that I don't believe anything he has told me."  "You know you believe it all," said Lord Henry, looking at him with his dreamy languorous eyes.
"I will go out to the garden with you.
It is horribly hot in the studio.
Basil, let us have something iced to drink, something with strawberries in it."  "Certainly, Harry.
Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will tell him what you want.
I have got to work up this background, so I will join you later on.
Don't keep Dorian too long.
I have never been in better form for painting than I am to-day.
This is going to be my masterpiece.
It is my masterpiece as it stands."  Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their perfume as if it had been wine.
He came close to him and put his hand upon his shoulder.
"You are quite right to do that," he murmured.
"Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul."  The lad started and drew back.
He was bareheaded, and the leaves had tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads.
There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are suddenly awakened.
His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.
"Yes," continued Lord Henry, "that is one of the great secrets of life--to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul.
You are a wonderful creation.
You know more than you think you know, just as you know less than you want to know."  Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away.
He could not help liking the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him.
His romantic, olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him.
There was something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating.
His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm.
They moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their own.
But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid.
Why had it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself?
He had known Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never altered him.
Suddenly there had come some one across his life who seemed to have disclosed to him life's mystery.
And, yet, what was there to be afraid of?
He was not a schoolboy or a girl.
It was absurd to be frightened.
"Let us go and sit in the shade," said Lord Henry.
"Parker has brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again.
You really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt.
It would be unbecoming."  "What can it matter?" cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on the seat at the end of the garden.
"It should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray."  "Why?"  "Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing worth having."  "I don't feel that, Lord Henry."  "No, you don't feel it now.
Some day, when you are old and wrinkled and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you will feel it terribly.
Now, wherever you go, you charm the world.
Will it always be so?
...
You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr. Gray.
Don't frown.
You have.
And beauty is a form of genius--is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation.
It is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon.
It cannot be questioned.
It has its divine right of sovereignty.
It makes princes of those who have it.
You smile?
Ah! when you have lost it you won't smile....
People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial.
That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as thought is.
To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders.
It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances.
The true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible....
Yes, Mr. Gray, the gods have been good to you.
But what the gods give they quickly take away.
You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly, and fully.
When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of your past will make more bitter than defeats.
Every month as it wanes brings you nearer to something dreadful.
Time is jealous of you, and wars against your lilies and your roses.
You will become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed.
You will suffer horribly....
Ah! realize your youth while you have it.
Don't squander the gold of your days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure, or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar.
These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age.
Live!  Live the wonderful life that is in you!  Let nothing be lost upon you.
Be always searching for new sensations.
Be afraid of nothing....
A new Hedonism--that is what our century wants.
You might be its visible symbol.
With your personality there is nothing you could not do.
The world belongs to you for a season....
The moment I met you I saw that you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really might be.
There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must tell you something about yourself.
I thought how tragic it would be if you were wasted.
For there is such a little time that your youth will last--such a little time.
The common hill-flowers wither, but they blossom again.
The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now.
In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars.
But we never get back our youth.
The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty becomes sluggish.
Our limbs fail, our senses rot.
We degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the courage to yield to.
Youth!  Youth!  There is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!"  Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering.
The spray of lilac fell from his hand upon the gravel.
A furry bee came and buzzed round it for a moment.
Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated globe of the tiny blossoms.
He watched it with that strange interest in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield.
After a time the bee flew away.
He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian convolvulus.
The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to and fro.
Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made staccato signs for them to come in.
They turned to each other and smiled.
"I am waiting," he cried.
"Do come in.
The light is quite perfect, and you can bring your drinks."  They rose up and sauntered down the walk together.
Two green-and-white butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of the garden a thrush began to sing.
"You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray," said Lord Henry, looking at him.
"Yes, I am glad now.
I wonder shall I always be glad?"  "Always!  That is a dreadful word.
It makes me shudder when I hear it.
Women are so fond of using it.
They spoil every romance by trying to make it last for ever.
It is a meaningless word, too.
The only difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a little longer."  As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord Henry's arm.
"In that case, let our friendship be a caprice," he murmured, flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and resumed his pose.
Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him.
The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back to look at his work from a distance.
In the slanting beams that streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden.
The heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.
After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the picture, biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning.
"It is quite finished," he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.
Lord Henry came over and examined the picture.
It was certainly a wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.
"My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly," he said.
"It is the finest portrait of modern times.
Mr. Gray, come over and look at yourself."  The lad started, as if awakened from some dream.
"Is it really finished?" he murmured, stepping down from the platform.
"Quite finished," said the painter.
"And you have sat splendidly to-day.
I am awfully obliged to you."  "That is entirely due to me," broke in Lord Henry.
"Isn't it, Mr. Gray?"  Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture and turned towards it.
When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure.
A look of joy came into his eyes, as if he had recognized himself for the first time.
He stood there motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to him, but not catching the meaning of his words.
The sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation.
He had never felt it before.
Basil Hallward's compliments had seemed to him to be merely the charming exaggeration of friendship.
He had listened to them, laughed at them, forgotten them.
They had not influenced his nature.
Then had come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his terrible warning of its brevity.
That had stirred him at the time, and now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full reality of the description flashed across him.
Yes, there would be a day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed.
The scarlet would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair.
The life that was to make his soul would mar his body.
He would become dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.
As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver.
His eyes deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears.
He felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.
"Don't you like it?" cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the lad's silence, not understanding what it meant.
"Of course he likes it," said Lord Henry.
"Who wouldn't like it?
It is one of the greatest things in modern art.
I will give you anything you like to ask for it.
I must have it."  "It is not my property, Harry."  "Whose property is it?"  "Dorian's, of course," answered the painter.
"He is a very lucky fellow."  "How sad it is!" murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon his own portrait.
"How sad it is!  I shall grow old, and horrible, and dreadful.
But this picture will remain always young.
It will never be older than this particular day of June....
If it were only the other way!  If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old!  For that--for that--I would give everything!  Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give!  I would give my soul for that!"  "You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil," cried Lord Henry, laughing.
"It would be rather hard lines on your work."  "I should object very strongly, Harry," said Hallward.
Dorian Gray turned and looked at him.
"I believe you would, Basil.
You like your art better than your friends.
I am no more to you than a green bronze figure.
Hardly as much, I dare say."  The painter stared in amazement.
It was so unlike Dorian to speak like that.
What had happened?
He seemed quite angry.
His face was flushed and his cheeks burning.
"Yes," he continued, "I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver Faun.
You will like them always.
How long will you like me?
Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose.
I know, now, that when one loses one's good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything.
Your picture has taught me that.
Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right.
Youth is the only thing worth having.
When I find that I am growing old, I shall kill myself."  Hallward turned pale and caught his hand.
"Dorian!  Dorian!" he cried, "don't talk like that.
I have never had such a friend as you, and I shall never have such another.
You are not jealous of material things, are you?--you who are finer than any of them!"  "I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die.
I am jealous of the portrait you have painted of me.
Why should it keep what I must lose?
Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives something to it.
Oh, if it were only the other way!  If the picture could change, and I could be always what I am now!  Why did you paint it?
It will mock me some day--mock me horribly!"  The hot tears welled into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.
"This is your doing, Harry," said the painter bitterly.
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"It is the real Dorian Gray--that is all."  "It is not."  "If it is not, what have I to do with it?"  "You should have gone away when I asked you," he muttered.
"I stayed when you asked me," was Lord Henry's answer.
"Harry, I can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever done, and I will destroy it.
What is it but canvas and colour?
I will not let it come across our three lives and mar them."  Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window.
What was he doing there?
His fingers were straying about among the litter of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something.
Yes, it was for the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel.
He had found it at last.
He was going to rip up the canvas.
With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of the studio.
"Don't, Basil, don't!" he cried.
"It would be murder!"  "I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian," said the painter coldly when he had recovered from his surprise.
"I never thought you would."  "Appreciate it?
I am in love with it, Basil.
It is part of myself.
I feel that."  "Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and sent home.
Then you can do what you like with yourself." And he walked across the room and rang the bell for tea.
"You will have tea, of course, Dorian?
And so will you, Harry?
Or do you object to such simple pleasures?"  "I adore simple pleasures," said Lord Henry.
"They are the last refuge of the complex.
But I don't like scenes, except on the stage.
What absurd fellows you are, both of you!  I wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal.
It was the most premature definition ever given.
Man is many things, but he is not rational.
I am glad he is not, after all--though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture.
You had much better let me have it, Basil.
This silly boy doesn't really want it, and I really do."  "If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you!" cried Dorian Gray; "and I don't allow people to call me a silly boy."  "You know the picture is yours, Dorian.
I gave it to you before it existed."  "And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."  "I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry."  "Ah! this morning!  You have lived since then."  There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table.
There was a rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn.
Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page.
Dorian Gray went over and poured out the tea.
The two men sauntered languidly to the table and examined what was under the covers.
"Let us go to the theatre to-night," said Lord Henry.
"There is sure to be something on, somewhere.
I have promised to dine at White's, but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement.
I think that would be a rather nice excuse:  it would have all the surprise of candour."  "It is such a bore putting on one's dress-clothes," muttered Hallward.
"And, when one has them on, they are so horrid."  "Yes," answered Lord Henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth century is detestable.
It is so sombre, so depressing.
Sin is the only real colour-element left in modern life."  "You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry."  "Before which Dorian?
The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the one in the picture?"  "Before either."  "I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry," said the lad.
"Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won't you?"  "I can't, really.
I would sooner not.
I have a lot of work to do."  "Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray."  "I should like that awfully."  The painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture.
"I shall stay with the real Dorian," he said, sadly.
"Is it the real Dorian?" cried the original of the portrait, strolling across to him.
"Am I really like that?"  "Yes; you are just like that."  "How wonderful, Basil!"  "At least you are like it in appearance.
But it will never alter," sighed Hallward.
"That is something."  "What a fuss people make about fidelity!" exclaimed Lord Henry.
"Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology.
It has nothing to do with our own will.
Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say."  "Don't go to the theatre to-night, Dorian," said Hallward.
"Stop and dine with me."  "I can't, Basil."  "Why?"  "Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him."  "He won't like you the better for keeping your promises.
He always breaks his own.
I beg you not to go."  Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.
"I entreat you."  The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them from the tea-table with an amused smile.
"I must go, Basil," he answered.
"Very well," said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on the tray.
"It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had better lose no time.
Good-bye, Harry.
Good-bye, Dorian.
Come and see me soon.
Come to-morrow."  "Certainly."  "You won't forget?"  "No, of course not," cried Dorian.
"And ...
Harry!"  "Yes, Basil?"  "Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning."  "I have forgotten it."  "I trust you."  "I wish I could trust myself," said Lord Henry, laughing.
"Come, Mr. Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place.
Good-bye, Basil.
It has been a most interesting afternoon."  As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.
At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him.
His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches, and his inordinate passion for pleasure.
The son, who had been his father's secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing.
He had two large town houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and took most of his meals at his club.
He paid some attention to the management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of burning wood on his own hearth.
In politics he was a Tory, except when the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them for being a pack of Radicals.
He was a hero to his valet, who bullied him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.
Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the country was going to the dogs.
His principles were out of date, but there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.
When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over _The Times_.
"Well, Harry," said the old gentleman, "what brings you out so early?
I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till five."  "Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George.
I want to get something out of you."  "Money, I suppose," said Lord Fermor, making a wry face.
"Well, sit down and tell me all about it.
Young people, nowadays, imagine that money is everything."  "Yes," murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; "and when they grow older they know it.
But I don't want money.
It is only people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay mine.
Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly upon it.
Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor's tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me.
What I want is information:  not useful information, of course; useless information."  "Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense.
When I was in the Diplomatic, things were much better.
But I hear they let them in now by examination.
What can you expect?
Examinations, sir, are pure humbug from beginning to end.
If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him."  "Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George," said Lord Henry languidly.
"Mr. Dorian Gray?
Who is he?" asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushy white eyebrows.
"That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George.
Or rather, I know who he is.
He is the last Lord Kelso's grandson.
His mother was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux.
I want you to tell me about his mother.
What was she like?
Whom did she marry?
You have known nearly everybody in your time, so you might have known her.
I am very much interested in Mr. Gray at present.
I have only just met him."  "Kelso's grandson!" echoed the old gentleman.
"Kelso's grandson! ...
Of course....
I knew his mother intimately.
I believe I was at her christening.
She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless young fellow--a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something of that kind.
Certainly.
I remember the whole thing as if it happened yesterday.
The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few months after the marriage.
There was an ugly story about it.
They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public--paid him, sir, to do it, paid him--and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon.
The thing was hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time afterwards.
He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she never spoke to him again.
Oh, yes; it was a bad business.
The girl died, too, died within a year.
So she left a son, did she?
I had forgotten that.
What sort of boy is he?
If he is like his mother, he must be a good-looking chap."  "He is very good-looking," assented Lord Henry.
"I hope he will fall into proper hands," continued the old man.
"He should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing by him.
His mother had money, too.
All the Selby property came to her, through her grandfather.
Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him a mean dog.
He was, too.
Came to Madrid once when I was there.
Egad, I was ashamed of him.
The Queen used to ask me about the English noble who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares.
They made quite a story of it.
I didn't dare show my face at Court for a month.
I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies."  "I don't know," answered Lord Henry.
"I fancy that the boy will be well off.
He is not of age yet.
He has Selby, I know.
He told me so.
And ...
his mother was very beautiful?"  "Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw, Harry.
What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could understand.
She could have married anybody she chose.
Carlington was mad after her.
She was romantic, though.
All the women of that family were.
The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful.
Carlington went on his knees to her.
Told me so himself.
She laughed at him, and there wasn't a girl in London at the time who wasn't after him.
And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an American?
Ain't English girls good enough for him?"  "It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George."  "I'll back English women against the world, Harry," said Lord Fermor, striking the table with his fist.
"The betting is on the Americans."  "They don't last, I am told," muttered his uncle.
"A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a steeplechase.
They take things flying.
I don't think Dartmoor has a chance."  "Who are her people?" grumbled the old gentleman.
"Has she got any?"  Lord Henry shook his head.
"American girls are as clever at concealing their parents, as English women are at concealing their past," he said, rising to go.
"They are pork-packers, I suppose?"  "I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor's sake.
I am told that pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after politics."  "Is she pretty?"  "She behaves as if she was beautiful.
Most American women do.
It is the secret of their charm."  "Why can't these American women stay in their own country?
They are always telling us that it is the paradise for women."  "It is.
That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively anxious to get out of it," said Lord Henry.
"Good-bye, Uncle George.
I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer.
Thanks for giving me the information I wanted.
I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my old ones."  "Where are you lunching, Harry?"  "At Aunt Agatha's.
I have asked myself and Mr. Gray.
He is her latest _protege_."  "Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with her charity appeals.
I am sick of them.
Why, the good woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads."  "All right, Uncle George, I'll tell her, but it won't have any effect.
Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity.
It is their distinguishing characteristic."  The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his servant.
Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.
So that was the story of Dorian Gray's parentage.
Crudely as it had been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a strange, almost modern romance.
A beautiful woman risking everything for a mad passion.
A few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a hideous, treacherous crime.
Months of voiceless agony, and then a child born in pain.
The mother snatched away by death, the boy left to solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man.
Yes; it was an interesting background.
It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it were.
Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something tragic.
Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might blow....
And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer rose the wakening wonder of his face.
Talking to him was like playing upon an exquisite violin.
He answered to every touch and thrill of the bow....
There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of influence.
No other activity was like it.
To project one's soul into some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one's own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of passion and youth; to convey one's temperament into another as though it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in that--perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and grossly common in its aims....
He was a marvellous type, too, this lad, whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil's studio, or could be fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate.
Grace was his, and the white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old Greek marbles kept for us.
There was nothing that one could not do with him.
He could be made a Titan or a toy.
What a pity it was that such beauty was destined to fade! ...
And Basil?
From a psychological point of view, how interesting he was!  The new manner in art, the fresh mode of looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing herself, Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value, as though they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect form whose shadow they made real:  how strange it all was!  He remembered something like it in history.
Was it not Plato, that artist in thought, who had first analyzed it?
Was it not Buonarotti who had carved it in the coloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence?
But in our own century it was strange....
Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray what, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned the wonderful portrait.
He would seek to dominate him--had already, indeed, half done so.
He would make that wonderful spirit his own.
There was something fascinating in this son of love and death.
Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses.
He found that he had passed his aunt's some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back.
When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they had gone in to lunch.
He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and passed into the dining-room.
"Late as usual, Harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.
He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to her, looked round to see who was there.
Dorian bowed to him shyly from the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek.
Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are described by contemporary historians as stoutness.
Next to her sat, on her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in accordance with a wise and well-known rule.
The post on her left was occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence, having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he had to say before he was thirty.
His own neighbour was Mrs.
Vandeleur, one of his aunt's oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.
Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of them ever quite escape.
"We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry," cried the duchess, nodding pleasantly to him across the table.
"Do you think he will really marry this fascinating young person?"  "I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess."  "How dreadful!" exclaimed Lady Agatha.
"Really, some one should interfere."  "I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American dry-goods store," said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.
"My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas."  "Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?" asked the duchess, raising her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.
"American novels," answered Lord Henry, helping himself to some quail.
The duchess looked puzzled.
"Don't mind him, my dear," whispered Lady Agatha.
"He never means anything that he says."  "When America was discovered," said the Radical member--and he began to give some wearisome facts.
Like all people who try to exhaust a subject, he exhausted his listeners.
The duchess sighed and exercised her privilege of interruption.
"I wish to goodness it never had been discovered at all!" she exclaimed.
"Really, our girls have no chance nowadays.
It is most unfair."  "Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered," said Mr. Erskine; "I myself would say that it had merely been detected."  "Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered the duchess vaguely.
"I must confess that most of them are extremely pretty.
And they dress well, too.
They get all their dresses in Paris.
I wish I could afford to do the same."  "They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris," chuckled Sir Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour's cast-off clothes.
"Really!  And where do bad Americans go to when they die?" inquired the duchess.
"They go to America," murmured Lord Henry.
Sir Thomas frowned.
"I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against that great country," he said to Lady Agatha.
"I have travelled all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil.
I assure you that it is an education to visit it."  "But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?" asked Mr. Erskine plaintively.
"I don't feel up to the journey."  Sir Thomas waved his hand.
"Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on his shelves.
We practical men like to see things, not to read about them.
The Americans are an extremely interesting people.
They are absolutely reasonable.
I think that is their distinguishing characteristic.
Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people.
I assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans."  "How dreadful!" cried Lord Henry.
"I can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable.
There is something unfair about its use.
It is hitting below the intellect."  "I do not understand you," said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.
"I do, Lord Henry," murmured Mr. Erskine, with a smile.
"Paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.
"Was that a paradox?" asked Mr. Erskine.
"I did not think so.
Perhaps it was.
Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth.
To test reality we must see it on the tight rope.
When the verities become acrobats, we can judge them."  "Dear me!" said Lady Agatha, "how you men argue!  I am sure I never can make out what you are talking about.
Oh!  Harry, I am quite vexed with you.
Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up the East End?
I assure you he would be quite invaluable.
They would love his playing."  "I want him to play to me," cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked down the table and caught a bright answering glance.
"But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel," continued Lady Agatha.
"I can sympathize with everything except suffering," said Lord Henry, shrugging his shoulders.
"I cannot sympathize with that.
It is too ugly, too horrible, too distressing.
There is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy with pain.
One should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life.
The less said about life's sores, the better."  "Still, the East End is a very important problem," remarked Sir Thomas with a grave shake of the head.
"Quite so," answered the young lord.
"It is the problem of slavery, and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves."  The politician looked at him keenly.
"What change do you propose, then?" he asked.
Lord Henry laughed.
"I don't desire to change anything in England except the weather," he answered.
"I am quite content with philosophic contemplation.
But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should appeal to science to put us straight.
The advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional."  "But we have such grave responsibilities," ventured Mrs.
Vandeleur timidly.
"Terribly grave," echoed Lady Agatha.
Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine.
"Humanity takes itself too seriously.
It is the world's original sin.
If the caveman had known how to laugh, history would have been different."  "You are really very comforting," warbled the duchess.
"I have always felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no interest at all in the East End.
For the future I shall be able to look her in the face without a blush."  "A blush is very becoming, Duchess," remarked Lord Henry.
"Only when one is young," she answered.
"When an old woman like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign.
Ah!  Lord Henry, I wish you would tell me how to become young again."  He thought for a moment.
"Can you remember any great error that you committed in your early days, Duchess?" he asked, looking at her across the table.
"A great many, I fear," she cried.
"Then commit them over again," he said gravely.
"To get back one's youth, one has merely to repeat one's follies."  "A delightful theory!" she exclaimed.
"I must put it into practice."  "A dangerous theory!" came from Sir Thomas's tight lips.
Lady Agatha shook her head, but could not help being amused.
Mr. Erskine listened.
"Yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life.
Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one's mistakes."  A laugh ran round the table.
He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent with fancy and winged it with paradox.
The praise of folly, as he went on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober.
Facts fled before her like frightened forest things.
Her white feet trod the huge press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over the vat's black, dripping, sloping sides.
It was an extraordinary improvisation.
He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him, and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and to lend colour to his imagination.
He was brilliant, fantastic, irresponsible.
He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they followed his pipe, laughing.
Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him, but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.
At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was waiting.
She wrung her hands in mock despair.
"How annoying!" she cried.
"I must go.
I have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meeting at Willis's Rooms, where he is going to be in the chair.
If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn't have a scene in this bonnet.
It is far too fragile.
A harsh word would ruin it.
No, I must go, dear Agatha.
Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing.
I am sure I don't know what to say about your views.
You must come and dine with us some night.
Tuesday?
Are you disengaged Tuesday?"  "For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess," said Lord Henry with a bow.
"Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you come"; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the other ladies.
When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. Erskine moved round, and taking a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.
"You talk books away," he said; "why don't you write one?"  "I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine.
I should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal.
But there is no literary public in England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias.
Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literature."  "I fear you are right," answered Mr. Erskine.
"I myself used to have literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago.
And now, my dear young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you really meant all that you said to us at lunch?"  "I quite forget what I said," smiled Lord Henry.
"Was it all very bad?"  "Very bad indeed.
In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being primarily responsible.
But I should like to talk to you about life.
The generation into which I was born was tedious.
Some day, when you are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess."  "I shall be charmed.
A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege.
It has a perfect host, and a perfect library."  "You will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous bow.
"And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt.
I am due at the Athenaeum.
It is the hour when we sleep there."  "All of you, Mr. Erskine?"  "Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs.
We are practising for an English Academy of Letters."  Lord Henry laughed and rose.
"I am going to the park," he cried.
As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm.
"Let me come with you," he murmured.
"But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him," answered Lord Henry.
"I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you.
Do let me.
And you will promise to talk to me all the time?
No one talks so wonderfully as you do."  "Ah!  I have talked quite enough for to-day," said Lord Henry, smiling.
"All I want now is to look at life.
You may come and look at it with me, if you care to."  One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry's house in Mayfair.
It was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk, long-fringed Persian rugs.
On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies that Queen had selected for her device.
Some large blue china jars and parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer day in London.
Lord Henry had not yet come in.
He was always late on principle, his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time.
So the lad was looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had found in one of the book-cases.
The formal monotonous ticking of the Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him.
Once or twice he thought of going away.
At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened.
"How late you are, Harry!" he murmured.
"I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray," answered a shrill voice.
He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet.
"I beg your pardon.
I thought--"  "You thought it was my husband.
It is only his wife.
You must let me introduce myself.
I know you quite well by your photographs.
I think my husband has got seventeen of them."  "Not seventeen, Lady Henry?"  "Well, eighteen, then.
And I saw you with him the other night at the opera."  She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her vague forget-me-not eyes.
She was a curious woman, whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest.
She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was never returned, she had kept all her illusions.
She tried to look picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy.
Her name was Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.
"That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?"  "Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin.
I like Wagner's music better than anybody's.
It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other people hearing what one says.
That is a great advantage, don't you think so, Mr. Gray?"  The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.
Dorian smiled and shook his head:  "I am afraid I don't think so, Lady Henry.
I never talk during music--at least, during good music.
If one hears bad music, it is one's duty to drown it in conversation."  "Ah! that is one of Harry's views, isn't it, Mr. Gray?
I always hear Harry's views from his friends.
It is the only way I get to know of them.
But you must not think I don't like good music.
I adore it, but I am afraid of it.
It makes me too romantic.
I have simply worshipped pianists--two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me.
I don't know what it is about them.
Perhaps it is that they are foreigners.
They all are, ain't they?
Even those that are born in England become foreigners after a time, don't they?
It is so clever of them, and such a compliment to art.
Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn't it?
You have never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray?
You must come.
I can't afford orchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners.
They make one's rooms look so picturesque.
But here is Harry!  Harry, I came in to look for you, to ask you something--I forget what it was--and I found Mr. Gray here.
We have had such a pleasant chat about music.
We have quite the same ideas.
No; I think our ideas are quite different.
But he has been most pleasant.
I am so glad I've seen him."  "I am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said Lord Henry, elevating his dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused smile.
"So sorry I am late, Dorian.
I went to look after a piece of old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it.
Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing."  "I am afraid I must be going," exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh.
"I have promised to drive with the duchess.
Good-bye, Mr. Gray.
Good-bye, Harry.
You are dining out, I suppose?
So am I.
Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury's."  "I dare say, my dear," said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of frangipanni.
Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the sofa.
"Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian," he said after a few puffs.
"Why, Harry?"  "Because they are so sentimental."  "But I like sentimental people."  "Never marry at all, Dorian.
Men marry because they are tired; women, because they are curious:  both are disappointed."  "I don't think I am likely to marry, Harry.
I am too much in love.
That is one of your aphorisms.
I am putting it into practice, as I do everything that you say."  "Who are you in love with?" asked Lord Henry after a pause.
"With an actress," said Dorian Gray, blushing.
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"That is a rather commonplace _debut_."  "You would not say so if you saw her, Harry."  "Who is she?"  "Her name is Sibyl Vane."  "Never heard of her."  "No one has.
People will some day, however.
She is a genius."  "My dear boy, no woman is a genius.
Women are a decorative sex.
They never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.
Women represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals."  "Harry, how can you?"  "My dear Dorian, it is quite true.
I am analysing women at present, so I ought to know.
The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was.
I find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain and the coloured.
The plain women are very useful.
If you want to gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down to supper.
The other women are very charming.
They commit one mistake, however.
They paint in order to try and look young.
Our grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly.
_Rouge_ and _esprit_ used to go together.
That is all over now.
As long as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly satisfied.
As for conversation, there are only five women in London worth talking to, and two of these can't be admitted into decent society.
However, tell me about your genius.
How long have you known her?"  "Ah!  Harry, your views terrify me."  "Never mind that.
How long have you known her?"  "About three weeks."  "And where did you come across her?"  "I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.
After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you.
You filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life.
For days after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins.
As I lounged in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they led.
Some of them fascinated me.
Others filled me with terror.
There was an exquisite poison in the air.
I had a passion for sensations....
Well, one evening about seven o'clock, I determined to go out in search of some adventure.
I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours, with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins, as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me.
I fancied a thousand things.
The mere danger gave me a sense of delight.
I remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret of life.
I don't know what I expected, but I went out and wandered eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black grassless squares.
About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills.
A hideous Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar.
He had greasy ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt.
'Have a box, my Lord?' he said, when he saw me, and he took off his hat with an air of gorgeous servility.
There was something about him, Harry, that amused me.
He was such a monster.
You will laugh at me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box.
To the present day I can't make out why I did so; and yet if I hadn't--my dear Harry, if I hadn't--I should have missed the greatest romance of my life.
I see you are laughing.
It is horrid of you!"  "I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you.
But you should not say the greatest romance of your life.
You should say the first romance of your life.
You will always be loved, and you will always be in love with love.
A _grande passion_ is the privilege of people who have nothing to do.
That is the one use of the idle classes of a country.
Don't be afraid.
There are exquisite things in store for you.
This is merely the beginning."  "Do you think my nature so shallow?" cried Dorian Gray angrily.
"No; I think your nature so deep."  "How do you mean?"  "My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really the shallow people.
What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination.
Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life of the intellect--simply a confession of failure.
Faithfulness!  I must analyse it some day.
The passion for property is in it.
There are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that others might pick them up.
But I don't want to interrupt you.
Go on with your story."  "Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face.
I looked out from behind the curtain and surveyed the house.
It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake.
The gallery and pit were fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the dress-circle.
Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."  "It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama."  "Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing.
I began to wonder what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill.
What do you think the play was, Harry?"  "I should think 'The Idiot Boy', or 'Dumb but Innocent'.
Our fathers used to like that sort of piece, I believe.
The longer I live, Dorian, the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is not good enough for us.
In art, as in politics, _les grandperes ont toujours tort_."  "This play was good enough for us, Harry.
It was Romeo and Juliet.
I must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare done in such a wretched hole of a place.
Still, I felt interested, in a sort of way.
At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act.
There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the drop-scene was drawn up and the play began.
Romeo was a stout elderly gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure like a beer-barrel.
Mercutio was almost as bad.
He was played by the low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most friendly terms with the pit.
They were both as grotesque as the scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth.
But Juliet!  Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were like the petals of a rose.
She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen in my life.
You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears.
I tell you, Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came across me.
And her voice--I never heard such a voice.
It was very low at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one's ear.
Then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a distant hautboy.
In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing.
There were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins.
You know how a voice can stir one.
Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane are two things that I shall never forget.
When I close my eyes, I hear them, and each of them says something different.
I don't know which to follow.
Why should I not love her?
Harry, I do love her.
She is everything to me in life.
Night after night I go to see her play.
One evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen.
I have seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from her lover's lips.
I have watched her wandering through the forest of Arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap.
She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of.
She has been innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike throat.
I have seen her in every age and in every costume.
Ordinary women never appeal to one's imagination.
They are limited to their century.
No glamour ever transfigures them.
One knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets.
One can always find them.
There is no mystery in any of them.
They ride in the park in the morning and chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon.
They have their stereotyped smile and their fashionable manner.
They are quite obvious.
But an actress!  How different an actress is!  Harry! why didn't you tell me that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"  "Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian."  "Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces."  "Don't run down dyed hair and painted faces.
There is an extraordinary charm in them, sometimes," said Lord Henry.
"I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane."  "You could not have helped telling me, Dorian.
All through your life you will tell me everything you do."  "Yes, Harry, I believe that is true.
I cannot help telling you things.
You have a curious influence over me.
If I ever did a crime, I would come and confess it to you.
You would understand me."  "People like you--the wilful sunbeams of life--don't commit crimes, Dorian.
But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same.
And now tell me--reach me the matches, like a good boy--thanks--what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?"  Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"Harry!  Sibyl Vane is sacred!"  "It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian," said Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.
"But why should you be annoyed?
I suppose she will belong to you some day.
When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one's self, and one always ends by deceiving others.
That is what the world calls a romance.
You know her, at any rate, I suppose?"  "Of course I know her.
On the first night I was at the theatre, the horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her.
I was furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona.
I think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something."  "I am not surprised."  "Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers.
I told him I never even read them.
He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought."  "I should not wonder if he was quite right there.
But, on the other hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all expensive."  "Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," laughed Dorian.
"By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre, and I had to go.
He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly recommended.
I declined.
The next night, of course, I arrived at the place again.
When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that I was a munificent patron of art.
He was a most offensive brute, though he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare.
He told me once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to 'The Bard,' as he insisted on calling him.
He seemed to think it a distinction."  "It was a distinction, my dear Dorian--a great distinction.
Most people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose of life.
To have ruined one's self over poetry is an honour.
But when did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?"  "The third night.
She had been playing Rosalind.
I could not help going round.
I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at me--at least I fancied that she had.
The old Jew was persistent.
He seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented.
It was curious my not wanting to know her, wasn't it?"  "No; I don't think so."  "My dear Harry, why?"  "I will tell you some other time.
Now I want to know about the girl."  "Sibyl?
Oh, she was so shy and so gentle.
There is something of a child about her.
Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious of her power.
I think we were both rather nervous.
The old Jew stood grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like children.
He would insist on calling me 'My Lord,' so I had to assure Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind.
She said quite simply to me, 'You look more like a prince.
I must call you Prince Charming.'"  "Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments."  "You don't understand her, Harry.
She regarded me merely as a person in a play.
She knows nothing of life.
She lives with her mother, a faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen better days."  "I know that look.
It depresses me," murmured Lord Henry, examining his rings.
"The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest me."  "You were quite right.
There is always something infinitely mean about other people's tragedies."  "Sibyl is the only thing I care about.
What is it to me where she came from?
From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and entirely divine.
Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every night she is more marvellous."  "That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now.
I thought you must have some curious romance on hand.
You have; but it is not quite what I expected."  "My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have been to the opera with you several times," said Dorian, opening his blue eyes in wonder.
"You always come dreadfully late."  "Well, I can't help going to see Sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is only for a single act.
I get hungry for her presence; and when I think of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I am filled with awe."  "You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can't you?"  He shook his head.
"To-night she is Imogen," he answered, "and to-morrow night she will be Juliet."  "When is she Sibyl Vane?"  "Never."  "I congratulate you."  "How horrid you are!  She is all the great heroines of the world in one.
She is more than an individual.
You laugh, but I tell you she has genius.
I love her, and I must make her love me.
You, who know all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me!  I want to make Romeo jealous.
I want the dead lovers of the world to hear our laughter and grow sad.
I want a breath of our passion to stir their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain.
My God, Harry, how I worship her!"  He was walking up and down the room as he spoke.
Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks.
He was terribly excited.
Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure.
How different he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward's studio!  His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of scarlet flame.
Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and desire had come to meet it on the way.
"And what do you propose to do?" said Lord Henry at last.
"I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act.
I have not the slightest fear of the result.
You are certain to acknowledge her genius.
Then we must get her out of the Jew's hands.
She is bound to him for three years--at least for two years and eight months--from the present time.
I shall have to pay him something, of course.
When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and bring her out properly.
She will make the world as mad as she has made me."  "That would be impossible, my dear boy."  "Yes, she will.
She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it is personalities, not principles, that move the age."  "Well, what night shall we go?"  "Let me see.
To-day is Tuesday.
Let us fix to-morrow.
She plays Juliet to-morrow."  "All right.
The Bristol at eight o'clock; and I will get Basil."  "Not eight, Harry, please.
Half-past six.
We must be there before the curtain rises.
You must see her in the first act, where she meets Romeo."  "Half-past six!  What an hour!  It will be like having a meat-tea, or reading an English novel.
It must be seven.
No gentleman dines before seven.
Shall you see Basil between this and then?
Or shall I write to him?"  "Dear Basil!  I have not laid eyes on him for a week.
It is rather horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit that I delight in it.
Perhaps you had better write to him.
I don't want to see him alone.
He says things that annoy me.
He gives me good advice."  Lord Henry smiled.
"People are very fond of giving away what they need most themselves.
It is what I call the depth of generosity."  "Oh, Basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit of a Philistine.
Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered that."  "Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his work.
The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his prejudices, his principles, and his common sense.
The only artists I have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.
Good artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly uninteresting in what they are.
A great poet, a really great poet, is the most unpoetical of all creatures.
But inferior poets are absolutely fascinating.
The worse their rhymes are, the more picturesque they look.
The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible.
He lives the poetry that he cannot write.
The others write the poetry that they dare not realize."  "I wonder is that really so, Harry?" said Dorian Gray, putting some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that stood on the table.
"It must be, if you say it.
And now I am off.
Imogen is waiting for me.
Don't forget about to-morrow.
Good-bye."  As he left the room, Lord Henry's heavy eyelids drooped, and he began to think.
Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as Dorian Gray, and yet the lad's mad adoration of some one else caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy.
He was pleased by it.
It made him a more interesting study.
He had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no import.
And so he had begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by vivisecting others.
Human life--that appeared to him the one thing worth investigating.
Compared to it there was nothing else of any value.
It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one's face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams.
There were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken of them.
There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to understand their nature.
And, yet, what a great reward one received!  How wonderful the whole world became to one!  To note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life of the intellect--to observe where they met, and where they separated, at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at discord--there was a delight in that!  What matter what the cost was?
One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.
He was conscious--and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his brown agate eyes--that it was through certain words of his, musical words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray's soul had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her.
To a large extent the lad was his own creation.
He had made him premature.
That was something.
Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away.
Sometimes this was the effect of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately with the passions and the intellect.
But now and then a complex personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed, in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces, just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.
Yes, the lad was premature.
He was gathering his harvest while it was yet spring.
The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was becoming self-conscious.
It was delightful to watch him.
With his beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at.
It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end.
He was like one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense of beauty, and whose wounds are like red roses.
Soul and body, body and soul--how mysterious they were!  There was animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.
The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade.
Who could say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began?
How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists! And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools!  Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin?
Or was the body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought?
The separation of spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a mystery also.
He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us.
As it was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others.
Experience was of no ethical value.
It was merely the name men gave to their mistakes.
Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow and showed us what to avoid.
But there was no motive power in experience.
It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself.
All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we would do many times, and with joy.
It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results.
His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest.
There was no doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex passion.
What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination, changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous.
It was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most strongly over us.
Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we were conscious.
It often happened that when we thought we were experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.
While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for dinner.
He got up and looked out into the street.
The sunset had smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite.
The panes glowed like plates of heated metal.
The sky above was like a faded rose.
He thought of his friend's young fiery-coloured life and wondered how it was all going to end.
When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o'clock, he saw a telegram lying on the hall table.
He opened it and found it was from Dorian Gray.
It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl Vane.
"Mother, Mother, I am so happy!" whispered the girl, burying her face in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their dingy sitting-room contained.
"I am so happy!" she repeated, "and you must be happy, too!"  Mrs.
Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her daughter's head.
"Happy!" she echoed, "I am only happy, Sibyl, when I see you act.
You must not think of anything but your acting.
Mr. Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money."  The girl looked up and pouted.
"Money, Mother?" she cried, "what does money matter?
Love is more than money."  "Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to get a proper outfit for James.
You must not forget that, Sibyl.
Fifty pounds is a very large sum.
Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate."  "He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me," said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.
"I don't know how we could manage without him," answered the elder woman querulously.
Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed.
"We don't want him any more, Mother.
Prince Charming rules life for us now." Then she paused.
A rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks.
Quick breath parted the petals of her lips.
They trembled.
Some southern wind of passion swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress.
"I love him," she said simply.
"Foolish child! foolish child!" was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.
The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the words.
The girl laughed again.
The joy of a caged bird was in her voice.
Her eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a moment, as though to hide their secret.
When they opened, the mist of a dream had passed across them.
Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name of common sense.
She did not listen.
She was free in her prison of passion.
Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her.
She had called on memory to remake him.
She had sent her soul to search for him, and it had brought him back.
His kiss burned again upon her mouth.
Her eyelids were warm with his breath.
Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery.
This young man might be rich.
If so, marriage should be thought of.
Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning.
The arrows of craft shot by her.
She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.
Suddenly she felt the need to speak.
The wordy silence troubled her.
"Mother, Mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much?
I know why I love him.
I love him because he is like what love himself should be.
But what does he see in me?
I am not worthy of him.
And yet--why, I cannot tell--though I feel so much beneath him, I don't feel humble.
I feel proud, terribly proud.
Mother, did you love my father as I love Prince Charming?"  The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain.
Sybil rushed to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her.
"Forgive me, Mother.
I know it pains you to talk about our father.
But it only pains you because you loved him so much.
Don't look so sad.
I am as happy to-day as you were twenty years ago.
Ah! let me be happy for ever!"  "My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love.
Besides, what do you know of this young man?
You don't even know his name.
The whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you should have shown more consideration.
However, as I said before, if he is rich ..."  "Ah!  Mother, Mother, let me be happy!"  Mrs.
Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a stage-player, clasped her in her arms.
At this moment, the door opened and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room.
He was thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat clumsy in movement.
He was not so finely bred as his sister.
One would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between them.
Mrs.
Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile.
She mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience.
She felt sure that the _tableau_ was interesting.
"You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think," said the lad with a good-natured grumble.
"Ah! but you don't like being kissed, Jim," she cried.
"You are a dreadful old bear."  And she ran across the room and hugged him.
James Vane looked into his sister's face with tenderness.
"I want you to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl.
I don't suppose I shall ever see this horrid London again.
I am sure I don't want to."  "My son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured Mrs.
Vane, taking up a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it.
She felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group.
It would have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.
"Why not, Mother?
I mean it."  "You pain me, my son.
I trust you will return from Australia in a position of affluence.
I believe there is no society of any kind in the Colonies--nothing that I would call society--so when you have made your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London."  "Society!" muttered the lad.
"I don't want to know anything about that.
I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the stage.
I hate it."  "Oh, Jim!" said Sibyl, laughing, "how unkind of you!  But are you really going for a walk with me?
That will be nice!  I was afraid you were going to say good-bye to some of your friends--to Tom Hardy, who gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for smoking it.
It is very sweet of you to let me have your last afternoon.
Where shall we go?
Let us go to the park."  "I am too shabby," he answered, frowning.
"Only swell people go to the park."  "Nonsense, Jim," she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.
He hesitated for a moment.
"Very well," he said at last, "but don't be too long dressing."  She danced out of the door.
One could hear her singing as she ran upstairs.
Her little feet pattered overhead.
He walked up and down the room two or three times.
Then he turned to the still figure in the chair.
"Mother, are my things ready?" he asked.
"Quite ready, James," she answered, keeping her eyes on her work.
For some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this rough stern son of hers.
Her shallow secret nature was troubled when their eyes met.
She used to wonder if he suspected anything.
The silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her.
She began to complain.
Women defend themselves by attacking, just as they attack by sudden and strange surrenders.
"I hope you will be contented, James, with your sea-faring life," she said.
"You must remember that it is your own choice.
You might have entered a solicitor's office.
Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in the country often dine with the best families."  "I hate offices, and I hate clerks," he replied.
"But you are quite right.
I have chosen my own life.
All I say is, watch over Sibyl.
Don't let her come to any harm.
Mother, you must watch over her."  "James, you really talk very strangely.
Of course I watch over Sibyl."  "I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to talk to her.
Is that right?
What about that?"  "You are speaking about things you don't understand, James.
In the profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying attention.
I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time.
That was when acting was really understood.
As for Sibyl, I do not know at present whether her attachment is serious or not.
But there is no doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman.
He is always most polite to me.
Besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely."  "You don't know his name, though," said the lad harshly.
"No," answered his mother with a placid expression in her face.
"He has not yet revealed his real name.
I think it is quite romantic of him.
He is probably a member of the aristocracy."  James Vane bit his lip.
"Watch over Sibyl, Mother," he cried, "watch over her."  "My son, you distress me very much.
Sibyl is always under my special care.
Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why she should not contract an alliance with him.
I trust he is one of the aristocracy.
He has all the appearance of it, I must say.
It might be a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl.
They would make a charming couple.
His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices them."  The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane with his coarse fingers.
He had just turned round to say something when the door opened and Sibyl ran in.
"How serious you both are!" she cried.
"What is the matter?"  "Nothing," he answered.
"I suppose one must be serious sometimes.
Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o'clock.
Everything is packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble."  "Good-bye, my son," she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.
She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.
"Kiss me, Mother," said the girl.
Her flowerlike lips touched the withered cheek and warmed its frost.
"My child! my child!" cried Mrs.
Vane, looking up to the ceiling in search of an imaginary gallery.
"Come, Sibyl," said her brother impatiently.
He hated his mother's affectations.
They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled down the dreary Euston Road.
The passersby glanced in wonder at the sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl.
He was like a common gardener walking with a rose.
Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of some stranger.
He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace.
Sibyl, however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing.
Her love was trembling in laughter on her lips.
She was thinking of Prince Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted bushrangers.
For he was not to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or whatever he was going to be.
Oh, no!  A sailor's existence was dreadful.
Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands!  He was to leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain, and go off at once to the gold-fields.
Before a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen.
The bushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter.
Or, no.
He was not to go to the gold-fields at all.
They were horrid places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad language.
He was to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was riding home, he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a robber on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her.
Of course, she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London.
Yes, there were delightful things in store for him.
But he must be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly.
She was only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more of life.
He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep.
God was very good, and would watch over him.
She would pray for him, too, and in a few years he would come back quite rich and happy.
The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer.
He was heart-sick at leaving home.
Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.
Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger of Sibyl's position.
This young dandy who was making love to her could mean her no good.
He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account, and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him.
He was conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother's nature, and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl's happiness.
Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge them; sometimes they forgive them.
His mother!  He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that he had brooded on for many months of silence.
A chance phrase that he had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of horrible thoughts.
He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a hunting-crop across his face.
His brows knit together into a wedge-like furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.
"You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim," cried Sibyl, "and I am making the most delightful plans for your future.
Do say something."  "What do you want me to say?"  "Oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered, smiling at him.
He shrugged his shoulders.
"You are more likely to forget me than I am to forget you, Sibyl."  She flushed.
"What do you mean, Jim?" she asked.
"You have a new friend, I hear.
Who is he?
Why have you not told me about him?
He means you no good."  "Stop, Jim!" she exclaimed.
"You must not say anything against him.
I love him."  "Why, you don't even know his name," answered the lad.
"Who is he?
I have a right to know."  "He is called Prince Charming.
Don't you like the name.
Oh! you silly boy! you should never forget it.
If you only saw him, you would think him the most wonderful person in the world.
Some day you will meet him--when you come back from Australia.
You will like him so much.
Everybody likes him, and I ...
love him.
I wish you could come to the theatre to-night.
He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet.
Oh! how I shall play it!  Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet! To have him sitting there!  To play for his delight!  I am afraid I may frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them.
To be in love is to surpass one's self.
Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting 'genius' to his loafers at the bar.
He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he will announce me as a revelation.
I feel it.
And it is all his, his only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces.
But I am poor beside him.
Poor?
What does that matter?
When poverty creeps in at the door, love flies in through the window.
Our proverbs want rewriting.
They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time for me, I think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies."  "He is a gentleman," said the lad sullenly.
"A prince!" she cried musically.
"What more do you want?"  "He wants to enslave you."  "I shudder at the thought of being free."  "I want you to beware of him."  "To see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him."  "Sibyl, you are mad about him."  She laughed and took his arm.
"You dear old Jim, you talk as if you were a hundred.
Some day you will be in love yourself.
Then you will know what it is.
Don't look so sulky.
Surely you should be glad to think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have ever been before.
Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and difficult.
But it will be different now.
You are going to a new world, and I have found one.
Here are two chairs; let us sit down and see the smart people go by."  They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers.
The tulip-beds across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire.
A white dust--tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed--hung in the panting air.
The brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous butterflies.
She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects.
He spoke slowly and with effort.
They passed words to each other as players at a game pass counters.
Sibyl felt oppressed.
She could not communicate her joy.
A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all the echo she could win.
After some time she became silent.
Suddenly she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.
She started to her feet.
"There he is!" she cried.
"Who?" said Jim Vane.
"Prince Charming," she answered, looking after the victoria.
He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm.
"Show him to me.
Which is he?
Point him out.
I must see him!" he exclaimed; but at that moment the Duke of Berwick's four-in-hand came between, and when it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.
"He is gone," murmured Sibyl sadly.
"I wish you had seen him."  "I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever does you any wrong, I shall kill him."  She looked at him in horror.
He repeated his words.
They cut the air like a dagger.
The people round began to gape.
A lady standing close to her tittered.
"Come away, Jim; come away," she whispered.
He followed her doggedly as she passed through the crowd.
He felt glad at what he had said.
When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round.
There was pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips.
She shook her head at him.
"You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy, that is all.
How can you say such horrible things?
You don't know what you are talking about.
You are simply jealous and unkind.
Ah!  I wish you would fall in love.
Love makes people good, and what you said was wicked."  "I am sixteen," he answered, "and I know what I am about.
Mother is no help to you.
She doesn't understand how to look after you.
I wish now that I was not going to Australia at all.
I have a great mind to chuck the whole thing up.
I would, if my articles hadn't been signed."  "Oh, don't be so serious, Jim.
You are like one of the heroes of those silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in.
I am not going to quarrel with you.
I have seen him, and oh! to see him is perfect happiness.
We won't quarrel.
I know you would never harm any one I love, would you?"  "Not as long as you love him, I suppose," was the sullen answer.
"I shall love him for ever!" she cried.
"And he?"  "For ever, too!"  "He had better."  She shrank from him.
Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm.
He was merely a boy.
At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to their shabby home in the Euston Road.
It was after five o'clock, and Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting.
Jim insisted that she should do so.
He said that he would sooner part with her when their mother was not present.
She would be sure to make a scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.
In Sybil's own room they parted.
There was jealousy in the lad's heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed to him, had come between them.
Yet, when her arms were flung round his neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed her with real affection.
There were tears in his eyes as he went downstairs.
His mother was waiting for him below.
She grumbled at his unpunctuality, as he entered.
He made no answer, but sat down to his meagre meal.
The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the stained cloth.
Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that was left to him.
After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his hands.
He felt that he had a right to know.
It should have been told to him before, if it was as he suspected.
Leaden with fear, his mother watched him.
Words dropped mechanically from her lips.
A tattered lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers.
When the clock struck six, he got up and went to the door.
Then he turned back and looked at her.
Their eyes met.
In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy.
It enraged him.
"Mother, I have something to ask you," he said.
Her eyes wandered vaguely about the room.
She made no answer.
"Tell me the truth.
I have a right to know.
Were you married to my father?"  She heaved a deep sigh.
It was a sigh of relief.
The terrible moment, the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded, had come at last, and yet she felt no terror.
Indeed, in some measure it was a disappointment to her.
The vulgar directness of the question called for a direct answer.
The situation had not been gradually led up to.
It was crude.
It reminded her of a bad rehearsal.
"No," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.
"My father was a scoundrel then!" cried the lad, clenching his fists.
She shook her head.
"I knew he was not free.
We loved each other very much.
If he had lived, he would have made provision for us.
Don't speak against him, my son.
He was your father, and a gentleman.
Indeed, he was highly connected."  An oath broke from his lips.
"I don't care for myself," he exclaimed, "but don't let Sibyl....
It is a gentleman, isn't it, who is in love with her, or says he is?
Highly connected, too, I suppose."  For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman.
Her head drooped.
She wiped her eyes with shaking hands.
"Sibyl has a mother," she murmured; "I had none."  The lad was touched.
He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed her.
"I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father," he said, "but I could not help it.
I must go now.
Good-bye.
Don't forget that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him down, and kill him like a dog.
I swear it."  The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid to her.
She was familiar with the atmosphere.
She breathed more freely, and for the first time for many months she really admired her son.
She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same emotional scale, but he cut her short.
Trunks had to be carried down and mufflers looked for.
The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out.
There was the bargaining with the cabman.
The moment was lost in vulgar details.
It was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son drove away.
She was conscious that a great opportunity had been wasted.
She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after.
She remembered the phrase.
It had pleased her.
Of the threat she said nothing.
It was vividly and dramatically expressed.
She felt that they would all laugh at it some day.
"I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?" said Lord Henry that evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol where dinner had been laid for three.
"No, Harry," answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing waiter.
"What is it?
Nothing about politics, I hope!  They don't interest me.
There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little whitewashing."  "Dorian Gray is engaged to be married," said Lord Henry, watching him as he spoke.
Hallward started and then frowned.
"Dorian engaged to be married!" he cried.
"Impossible!"  "It is perfectly true."  "To whom?"  "To some little actress or other."  "I can't believe it.
Dorian is far too sensible."  "Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear Basil."  "Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry."  "Except in America," rejoined Lord Henry languidly.
"But I didn't say he was married.
I said he was engaged to be married.
There is a great difference.
I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have no recollection at all of being engaged.
I am inclined to think that I never was engaged."  "But think of Dorian's birth, and position, and wealth.
It would be absurd for him to marry so much beneath him."  "If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil.
He is sure to do it, then.
Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives."  "I hope the girl is good, Harry.
I don't want to see Dorian tied to some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his intellect."  "Oh, she is better than good--she is beautiful," murmured Lord Henry, sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters.
"Dorian says she is beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind.
Your portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal appearance of other people.
It has had that excellent effect, amongst others.
We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn't forget his appointment."  "Are you serious?"  "Quite serious, Basil.
I should be miserable if I thought I should ever be more serious than I am at the present moment."  "But do you approve of it, Harry?" asked the painter, walking up and down the room and biting his lip.
"You can't approve of it, possibly.
It is some silly infatuation."  "I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now.
It is an absurd attitude to take towards life.
We are not sent into the world to air our moral prejudices.
I never take any notice of what common people say, and I never interfere with what charming people do.
If a personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality selects is absolutely delightful to me.
Dorian Gray falls in love with a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her.
Why not?
If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less interesting.
You know I am not a champion of marriage.
The real drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselfish.
And unselfish people are colourless.
They lack individuality.
Still, there are certain temperaments that marriage makes more complex.
They retain their egotism, and add to it many other egos.
They are forced to have more than one life.
They become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should fancy, the object of man's existence.
Besides, every experience is of value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an experience.
I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife, passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become fascinated by some one else.
He would be a wonderful study."  "You don't mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you don't.
If Dorian Gray's life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than yourself.
You are much better than you pretend to be."  Lord Henry laughed.
"The reason we all like to think so well of others is that we are all afraid for ourselves.
The basis of optimism is sheer terror.
We think that we are generous because we credit our neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to us.
We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account, and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare our pockets.
I mean everything that I have said.
I have the greatest contempt for optimism.
As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but one whose growth is arrested.
If you want to mar a nature, you have merely to reform it.
As for marriage, of course that would be silly, but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women.
I will certainly encourage them.
They have the charm of being fashionable.
But here is Dorian himself.
He will tell you more than I can."  "My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!" said the lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn.
"I have never been so happy.
Of course, it is sudden--all really delightful things are.
And yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my life." He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked extraordinarily handsome.
"I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian," said Hallward, "but I don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement.
You let Harry know."  "And I don't forgive you for being late for dinner," broke in Lord Henry, putting his hand on the lad's shoulder and smiling as he spoke.
"Come, let us sit down and try what the new _chef_ here is like, and then you will tell us how it all came about."  "There is really not much to tell," cried Dorian as they took their seats at the small round table.
"What happened was simply this.
After I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and went down at eight o'clock to the theatre.
Sibyl was playing Rosalind.
Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd.
But Sibyl! You should have seen her!  When she came on in her boy's clothes, she was perfectly wonderful.
She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little green cap with a hawk's feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak lined with dull red.
She had never seemed to me more exquisite.
She had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in your studio, Basil.
Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves round a pale rose.
As for her acting--well, you shall see her to-night.
She is simply a born artist.
I sat in the dingy box absolutely enthralled.
I forgot that I was in London and in the nineteenth century.
I was away with my love in a forest that no man had ever seen.
After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke to her.
As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes a look that I had never seen there before.
My lips moved towards hers.
We kissed each other.
I can't describe to you what I felt at that moment.
It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect point of rose-coloured joy.
She trembled all over and shook like a white narcissus.
Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed my hands.
I feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can't help it.
Of course, our engagement is a dead secret.
She has not even told her own mother.
I don't know what my guardians will say.
Lord Radley is sure to be furious.
I don't care.
I shall be of age in less than a year, and then I can do what I like.
I have been right, Basil, haven't I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare's plays?
Lips that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their secret in my ear.
I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and kissed Juliet on the mouth."  "Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right," said Hallward slowly.
"Have you seen her to-day?" asked Lord Henry.
Dorian Gray shook his head.
"I left her in the forest of Arden; I shall find her in an orchard in Verona."  Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner.
"At what particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian?
And what did she say in answer?
Perhaps you forgot all about it."  "My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did not make any formal proposal.
I told her that I loved her, and she said she was not worthy to be my wife.
Not worthy!  Why, the whole world is nothing to me compared with her."  "Women are wonderfully practical," murmured Lord Henry, "much more practical than we are.
In situations of that kind we often forget to say anything about marriage, and they always remind us."  Hallward laid his hand upon his arm.
"Don't, Harry.
You have annoyed Dorian.
He is not like other men.
He would never bring misery upon any one.
His nature is too fine for that."  Lord Henry looked across the table.
"Dorian is never annoyed with me," he answered.
"I asked the question for the best reason possible, for the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any question--simple curiosity.
I have a theory that it is always the women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women.
Except, of course, in middle-class life.
But then the middle classes are not modern."  Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head.
"You are quite incorrigible, Harry; but I don't mind.
It is impossible to be angry with you.
When you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her would be a beast, a beast without a heart.
I cannot understand how any one can wish to shame the thing he loves.
I love Sibyl Vane.
I want to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the woman who is mine.
What is marriage?
An irrevocable vow.
You mock at it for that.
Ah! don't mock.
It is an irrevocable vow that I want to take.
Her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good.
When I am with her, I regret all that you have taught me.
I become different from what you have known me to be.
I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl Vane's hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous, delightful theories."  "And those are ...?" asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.
"Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories about pleasure.
All your theories, in fact, Harry."  "Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about," he answered in his slow melodious voice.
"But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory as my own.
It belongs to Nature, not to me.
Pleasure is Nature's test, her sign of approval.
When we are happy, we are always good, but when we are good, we are not always happy."  "Ah! but what do you mean by good?" cried Basil Hallward.
"Yes," echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, Harry?"  "To be good is to be in harmony with one's self," he replied, touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.
"Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others.
One's own life--that is the important thing.
As for the lives of one's neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one's moral views about them, but they are not one's concern.
Besides, individualism has really the higher aim.
Modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one's age.
I consider that for any man of culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest immorality."  "But, surely, if one lives merely for one's self, Harry, one pays a terrible price for doing so?" suggested the painter.
"Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays.
I should fancy that the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but self-denial.
Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege of the rich."  "One has to pay in other ways but money."  "What sort of ways, Basil?"  "Oh!  I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ...
well, in the consciousness of degradation."  Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"My dear fellow, mediaeval art is charming, but mediaeval emotions are out of date.
One can use them in fiction, of course.
But then the only things that one can use in fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact.
Believe me, no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever knows what a pleasure is."  "I know what pleasure is," cried Dorian Gray.
"It is to adore some one."  "That is certainly better than being adored," he answered, toying with some fruits.
"Being adored is a nuisance.
Women treat us just as humanity treats its gods.
They worship us, and are always bothering us to do something for them."  "I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to us," murmured the lad gravely.
"They create love in our natures.
They have a right to demand it back."  "That is quite true, Dorian," cried Hallward.
"Nothing is ever quite true," said Lord Henry.
"This is," interrupted Dorian.
"You must admit, Harry, that women give to men the very gold of their lives."  "Possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such very small change.
That is the worry.
Women, as some witty Frenchman once put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always prevent us from carrying them out."  "Harry, you are dreadful!  I don't know why I like you so much."  "You will always like me, Dorian," he replied.
"Will you have some coffee, you fellows?
Waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and some cigarettes.
No, don't mind the cigarettes--I have some.
Basil, I can't allow you to smoke cigars.
You must have a cigarette.
A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure.
It is exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisfied.
What more can one want?
Yes, Dorian, you will always be fond of me.
I represent to you all the sins you have never had the courage to commit."  "What nonsense you talk, Harry!" cried the lad, taking a light from a fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
"Let us go down to the theatre.
When Sibyl comes on the stage you will have a new ideal of life.
She will represent something to you that you have never known."  "I have known everything," said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his eyes, "but I am always ready for a new emotion.
I am afraid, however, that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing.
Still, your wonderful girl may thrill me.
I love acting.
It is so much more real than life.
Let us go.
Dorian, you will come with me.
I am so sorry, Basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham.
You must follow us in a hansom."  They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing.
The painter was silent and preoccupied.
There was a gloom over him.
He could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better than many other things that might have happened.
After a few minutes, they all passed downstairs.
He drove off by himself, as had been arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in front of him.
A strange sense of loss came over him.
He felt that Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the past.
Life had come between them....
His eyes darkened, and the crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes.
When the cab drew up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.
For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with an oily tremulous smile.
He escorted them to their box with a sort of pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top of his voice.
Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever.
He felt as if he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban.
Lord Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him.
At least he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over a poet.
Hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit.
The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire.
The youths in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them over the side.
They talked to each other across the theatre and shared their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them.
Some women were laughing in the pit.
Their voices were horribly shrill and discordant.
The sound of the popping of corks came from the bar.
"What a place to find one's divinity in!" said Lord Henry.
"Yes!" answered Dorian Gray.
"It was here I found her, and she is divine beyond all living things.
When she acts, you will forget everything.
These common rough people, with their coarse faces and brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage.
They sit silently and watch her.
They weep and laugh as she wills them to do.
She makes them as responsive as a violin.
She spiritualizes them, and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one's self."  "The same flesh and blood as one's self!  Oh, I hope not!" exclaimed Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his opera-glass.
"Don't pay any attention to him, Dorian," said the painter.
"I understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl.
Any one you love must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must be fine and noble.
To spiritualize one's age--that is something worth doing.
If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world.
This marriage is quite right.
I did not think so at first, but I admit it now.
The gods made Sibyl Vane for you.
Without her you would have been incomplete."  "Thanks, Basil," answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand.
"I knew that you would understand me.
Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me.
But here is the orchestra.
It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for about five minutes.
Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is good in me."  A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage.
Yes, she was certainly lovely to look at--one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought, that he had ever seen.
There was something of the fawn in her shy grace and startled eyes.
A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded enthusiastic house.
She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed to tremble.
Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud.
Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her.
Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, "Charming! charming!"  The scene was the hall of Capulet's house, and Romeo in his pilgrim's dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends.
The band, such as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began.
Through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a creature from a finer world.
Her body swayed, while she danced, as a plant sways in the water.
The curves of her throat were the curves of a white lily.
Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.
Yet she was curiously listless.
She showed no sign of joy when her eyes rested on Romeo.
The few words she had to speak--      Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,         Which mannerly devotion shows in this;     For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,         And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss--  with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly artificial manner.
The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view of tone it was absolutely false.
It was wrong in colour.
It took away all the life from the verse.
It made the passion unreal.
Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her.
He was puzzled and anxious.
Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him.
She seemed to them to be absolutely incompetent.
They were horribly disappointed.
Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of the second act.
They waited for that.
If she failed there, there was nothing in her.
She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight.
That could not be denied.
But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew worse as she went on.
Her gestures became absurdly artificial.
She overemphasized everything that she had to say.
The beautiful passage--      Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,     Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek     For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night--  was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution.
When she leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines--          Although I joy in thee,     I have no joy of this contract to-night:     It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;     Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be     Ere one can say, "It lightens."  Sweet, good-night!     This bud of love by summer's ripening breath     May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet--  she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her.
It was not nervousness.
Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely self-contained.
It was simply bad art.
She was a complete failure.
Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their interest in the play.
They got restless, and began to talk loudly and to whistle.
The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage.
The only person unmoved was the girl herself.
When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat.
"She is quite beautiful, Dorian," he said, "but she can't act.
Let us go."  "I am going to see the play through," answered the lad, in a hard bitter voice.
"I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an evening, Harry.
I apologize to you both."  "My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill," interrupted Hallward.
"We will come some other night."  "I wish she were ill," he rejoined.
"But she seems to me to be simply callous and cold.
She has entirely altered.
Last night she was a great artist.
This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre actress."  "Don't talk like that about any one you love, Dorian.
Love is a more wonderful thing than art."  "They are both simply forms of imitation," remarked Lord Henry.
"But do let us go.
Dorian, you must not stay here any longer.
It is not good for one's morals to see bad acting.
Besides, I don't suppose you will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet like a wooden doll?
She is very lovely, and if she knows as little about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience.
There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating--people who know absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing.
Good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic! The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming.
Come to the club with Basil and myself.
We will smoke cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane.
She is beautiful.
What more can you want?"  "Go away, Harry," cried the lad.
"I want to be alone.
Basil, you must go.
Ah! can't you see that my heart is breaking?"  The hot tears came to his eyes.
His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.
"Let us go, Basil," said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his voice, and the two young men passed out together.
A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose on the third act.
Dorian Gray went back to his seat.
He looked pale, and proud, and indifferent.
The play dragged on, and seemed interminable.
Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots and laughing.
The whole thing was a _fiasco_.
The last act was played to almost empty benches.
The curtain went down on a titter and some groans.
As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the greenroom.
The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph on her face.
Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire.
There was a radiance about her.
Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of their own.
When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy came over her.
"How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!" she cried.
"Horribly!" he answered, gazing at her in amazement.
"Horribly!  It was dreadful.
Are you ill?
You have no idea what it was.
You have no idea what I suffered."  The girl smiled.
"Dorian," she answered, lingering over his name with long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to the red petals of her mouth.
"Dorian, you should have understood.
But you understand now, don't you?"  "Understand what?" he asked, angrily.
"Why I was so bad to-night.
Why I shall always be bad.
Why I shall never act well again."  He shrugged his shoulders.
"You are ill, I suppose.
When you are ill you shouldn't act.
You make yourself ridiculous.
My friends were bored.
I was bored."  She seemed not to listen to him.
She was transfigured with joy.
An ecstasy of happiness dominated her.
"Dorian, Dorian," she cried, "before I knew you, acting was the one reality of my life.
It was only in the theatre that I lived.
I thought that it was all true.
I was Rosalind one night and Portia the other.
The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia were mine also.
I believed in everything.
The common people who acted with me seemed to me to be godlike.
The painted scenes were my world.
I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real.
You came--oh, my beautiful love!--and you freed my soul from prison.
You taught me what reality really is.
To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had always played.
To-night, for the first time, I became conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to say.
You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is but a reflection.
You had made me understand what love really is.
My love!  My love!  Prince Charming!  Prince of life! I have grown sick of shadows.
You are more to me than all art can ever be.
What have I to do with the puppets of a play?
When I came on to-night, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone from me.
I thought that I was going to be wonderful.
I found that I could do nothing.
Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant.
The knowledge was exquisite to me.
I heard them hissing, and I smiled.
What could they know of love such as ours?
Take me away, Dorian--take me away with you, where we can be quite alone.
I hate the stage.
I might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire.
Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it signifies?
Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to play at being in love.
You have made me see that."  He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face.
"You have killed my love," he muttered.
She looked at him in wonder and laughed.
He made no answer.
She came across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair.
She knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips.
He drew them away, and a shudder ran through him.
Then he leaped up and went to the door.
"Yes," he cried, "you have killed my love.
You used to stir my imagination.
Now you don't even stir my curiosity.
You simply produce no effect.
I loved you because you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the shadows of art.
You have thrown it all away.
You are shallow and stupid.
My God! how mad I was to love you!  What a fool I have been! You are nothing to me now.
I will never see you again.
I will never think of you.
I will never mention your name.
You don't know what you were to me, once.
Why, once ...
Oh, I can't bear to think of it!  I wish I had never laid eyes upon you!  You have spoiled the romance of my life.
How little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art! Without your art, you are nothing.
I would have made you famous, splendid, magnificent.
The world would have worshipped you, and you would have borne my name.
What are you now?
A third-rate actress with a pretty face."  The girl grew white, and trembled.
She clenched her hands together, and her voice seemed to catch in her throat.
"You are not serious, Dorian?" she murmured.
"You are acting."  "Acting!  I leave that to you.
You do it so well," he answered bitterly.
She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her face, came across the room to him.
She put her hand upon his arm and looked into his eyes.
He thrust her back.
"Don't touch me!" he cried.
A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay there like a trampled flower.
"Dorian, Dorian, don't leave me!" she whispered.
"I am so sorry I didn't act well.
I was thinking of you all the time.
But I will try--indeed, I will try.
It came so suddenly across me, my love for you.
I think I should never have known it if you had not kissed me--if we had not kissed each other.
Kiss me again, my love.
Don't go away from me.
I couldn't bear it.
Oh! don't go away from me.
My brother ...
No; never mind.
He didn't mean it.
He was in jest....
But you, oh! can't you forgive me for to-night?
I will work so hard and try to improve.
Don't be cruel to me, because I love you better than anything in the world.
After all, it is only once that I have not pleased you.
But you are quite right, Dorian.
I should have shown myself more of an artist.
It was foolish of me, and yet I couldn't help it.
Oh, don't leave me, don't leave me." A fit of passionate sobbing choked her.
She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain.
There is always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has ceased to love.
Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic.
Her tears and sobs annoyed him.
"I am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice.
"I don't wish to be unkind, but I can't see you again.
You have disappointed me."  She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer.
Her little hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him.
He turned on his heel and left the room.
In a few moments he was out of the theatre.
Where he went to he hardly knew.
He remembered wandering through dimly lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking houses.
Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after him.
Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves like monstrous apes.
He had seen grotesque children huddled upon door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.
As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden.
The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed itself into a perfect pearl.
Huge carts filled with nodding lilies rumbled slowly down the polished empty street.
The air was heavy with the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an anodyne for his pain.
He followed into the market and watched the men unloading their waggons.
A white-smocked carter offered him some cherries.
He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money for them, and began to eat them listlessly.
They had been plucked at midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them.
A long line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge, jade-green piles of vegetables.
Under the portico, with its grey, sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls, waiting for the auction to be over.
Others crowded round the swinging doors of the coffee-house in the piazza.
The heavy cart-horses slipped and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings.
Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks.
Iris-necked and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.
After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home.
For a few moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.
The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like silver against it.
From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke was rising.
It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.
In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge's barge, that hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance, lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire.
He turned them out and, having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal.
As he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait Basil Hallward had painted of him.
He started back as if in surprise.
Then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled.
After he had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate.
Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it.
In the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed.
The expression looked different.
One would have said that there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth.
It was certainly strange.
He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind.
The bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky corners, where they lay shuddering.
But the strange expression that he had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be more intensified even.
The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.
He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory Cupids, one of Lord Henry's many presents to him, glanced hurriedly into its polished depths.
No line like that warped his red lips.
What did it mean?
He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it again.
There were no signs of any change when he looked into the actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had altered.
It was not a mere fancy of his own.
The thing was horribly apparent.
He threw himself into a chair and began to think.
Suddenly there flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward's studio the day the picture had been finished.
Yes, he remembered it perfectly.
He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood.
Surely his wish had not been fulfilled?
Such things were impossible.
It seemed monstrous even to think of them.
And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the touch of cruelty in the mouth.
Cruelty!  Had he been cruel?
It was the girl's fault, not his.
He had dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he had thought her great.
Then she had disappointed him.
She had been shallow and unworthy.
And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little child.
He remembered with what callousness he had watched her.
Why had he been made like that?
Why had such a soul been given to him?
But he had suffered also.
During the three terrible hours that the play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of torture.
His life was well worth hers.
She had marred him for a moment, if he had wounded her for an age.
Besides, women were better suited to bear sorrow than men.
They lived on their emotions.
They only thought of their emotions.
When they took lovers, it was merely to have some one with whom they could have scenes.
Lord Henry had told him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were.
Why should he trouble about Sibyl Vane?
She was nothing to him now.
But the picture?
What was he to say of that?
It held the secret of his life, and told his story.
It had taught him to love his own beauty.
Would it teach him to loathe his own soul?
Would he ever look at it again?
No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses.
The horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it.
Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that makes men mad.
The picture had not changed.
It was folly to think so.
Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel smile.
Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight.
Its blue eyes met his own.
A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the painted image of himself, came over him.
It had altered already, and would alter more.
Its gold would wither into grey.
Its red and white roses would die.
For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck and wreck its fairness.
But he would not sin.
The picture, changed or unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience.
He would resist temptation.
He would not see Lord Henry any more--would not, at any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil Hallward's garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things.
He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends, marry her, try to love her again.
Yes, it was his duty to do so.
She must have suffered more than he had.
Poor child!  He had been selfish and cruel to her.
The fascination that she had exercised over him would return.
They would be happy together.
His life with her would be beautiful and pure.
He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it.
"How horrible!" he murmured to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it.
When he stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath.
The fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions.
He thought only of Sibyl.
A faint echo of his love came back to him.
He repeated her name over and over again.
The birds that were singing in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.
It was long past noon when he awoke.
His valet had crept several times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late.
Finally his bell sounded, and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on a small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the three tall windows.
"Monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling.
"What o'clock is it, Victor?" asked Dorian Gray drowsily.
"One hour and a quarter, Monsieur."  How late it was!  He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over his letters.
One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by hand that morning.
He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside.
The others he opened listlessly.
They contained the usual collection of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable young men every morning during the season.
There was a rather heavy bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders offering to advance any sum of money at a moment's notice and at the most reasonable rates of interest.
After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the onyx-paved bathroom.
The cool water refreshed him after his long sleep.
He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through.
A dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.
As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round table close to the open window.
It was an exquisite day.
The warm air seemed laden with spices.
A bee flew in and buzzed round the blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before him.
He felt perfectly happy.
Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the portrait, and he started.
"Too cold for Monsieur?" asked his valet, putting an omelette on the table.
"I shut the window?"  Dorian shook his head.
"I am not cold," he murmured.
Was it all true?
Had the portrait really changed?
Or had it been simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where there had been a look of joy?
Surely a painted canvas could not alter?
The thing was absurd.
It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day.
It would make him smile.
And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing!  First in the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of cruelty round the warped lips.
He almost dreaded his valet leaving the room.
He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the portrait.
He was afraid of certainty.
When the coffee and cigarettes had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to tell him to remain.
As the door was closing behind him, he called him back.
The man stood waiting for his orders.
Dorian looked at him for a moment.
"I am not at home to any one, Victor," he said with a sigh.
The man bowed and retired.
Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen.
The screen was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern.
He scanned it curiously, wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man's life.
Should he move it aside, after all?
Why not let it stay there?
What was the use of knowing?
If the thing was true, it was terrible.
If it was not true, why trouble about it?
But what if, by some fate or deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change?
What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his own picture?
Basil would be sure to do that.
No; the thing had to be examined, and at once.
Anything would be better than this dreadful state of doubt.
He got up and locked both doors.
At least he would be alone when he looked upon the mask of his shame.
Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself face to face.
It was perfectly true.
The portrait had altered.
As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost scientific interest.
That such a change should have taken place was incredible to him.
And yet it was a fact.
Was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him?
Could it be that what that soul thought, they realized?--that what it dreamed, they made true?
Or was there some other, more terrible reason?
He shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the picture in sickened horror.
One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him.
It had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane.
It was not too late to make reparation for that.
She could still be his wife.
His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the fear of God to us all.
There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep.
But here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin.
Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.
Three o'clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir.
He was trying to gather up the scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was wandering.
He did not know what to do, or what to think.
Finally, he went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness.
He covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain.
There is a luxury in self-reproach.
When we blame ourselves, we feel that no one else has a right to blame us.
It is the confession, not the priest, that gives us absolution.
When Dorian had finished the letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.
Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry's voice outside.
"My dear boy, I must see you.
Let me in at once.
I can't bear your shutting yourself up like this."  He made no answer at first, but remained quite still.
The knocking still continued and grew louder.
Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was inevitable.
He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture, and unlocked the door.
"I am so sorry for it all, Dorian," said Lord Henry as he entered.
"But you must not think too much about it."  "Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?" asked the lad.
"Yes, of course," answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly pulling off his yellow gloves.
"It is dreadful, from one point of view, but it was not your fault.
Tell me, did you go behind and see her, after the play was over?"  "Yes."  "I felt sure you had.
Did you make a scene with her?"  "I was brutal, Harry--perfectly brutal.
But it is all right now.
I am not sorry for anything that has happened.
It has taught me to know myself better."  "Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way!  I was afraid I would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours."  "I have got through all that," said Dorian, shaking his head and smiling.
"I am perfectly happy now.
I know what conscience is, to begin with.
It is not what you told me it was.
It is the divinest thing in us.
Don't sneer at it, Harry, any more--at least not before me.
I want to be good.
I can't bear the idea of my soul being hideous."  "A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian!  I congratulate you on it.
But how are you going to begin?"  "By marrying Sibyl Vane."  "Marrying Sibyl Vane!" cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him in perplexed amazement.
"But, my dear Dorian--"  "Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say.
Something dreadful about marriage.
Don't say it.
Don't ever say things of that kind to me again.
Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me.
I am not going to break my word to her.
She is to be my wife."  "Your wife!  Dorian! ...
Didn't you get my letter?
I wrote to you this morning, and sent the note down by my own man."  "Your letter?
Oh, yes, I remember.
I have not read it yet, Harry.
I was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn't like.
You cut life to pieces with your epigrams."  "You know nothing then?"  "What do you mean?"  Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray, took both his hands in his own and held them tightly.
"Dorian," he said, "my letter--don't be frightened--was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is dead."  A cry of pain broke from the lad's lips, and he leaped to his feet, tearing his hands away from Lord Henry's grasp.
"Dead!  Sibyl dead! It is not true!  It is a horrible lie!  How dare you say it?"  "It is quite true, Dorian," said Lord Henry, gravely.
"It is in all the morning papers.
I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till I came.
There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not be mixed up in it.
Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris.
But in London people are so prejudiced.
Here, one should never make one's _debut_ with a scandal.
One should reserve that to give an interest to one's old age.
I suppose they don't know your name at the theatre?
If they don't, it is all right.
Did any one see you going round to her room?
That is an important point."  Dorian did not answer for a few moments.
He was dazed with horror.
Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, "Harry, did you say an inquest?
What did you mean by that?
Did Sibyl--?
Oh, Harry, I can't bear it!  But be quick.
Tell me everything at once."  "I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put in that way to the public.
It seems that as she was leaving the theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had forgotten something upstairs.
They waited some time for her, but she did not come down again.
They ultimately found her lying dead on the floor of her dressing-room.
She had swallowed something by mistake, some dreadful thing they use at theatres.
I don't know what it was, but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it.
I should fancy it was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously."  "Harry, Harry, it is terrible!" cried the lad.
"Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed up in it.
I see by _The Standard_ that she was seventeen.
I should have thought she was almost younger than that.
She looked such a child, and seemed to know so little about acting.
Dorian, you mustn't let this thing get on your nerves.
You must come and dine with me, and afterwards we will look in at the opera.
It is a Patti night, and everybody will be there.
You can come to my sister's box.
She has got some smart women with her."  "So I have murdered Sibyl Vane," said Dorian Gray, half to himself, "murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife.
Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that.
The birds sing just as happily in my garden.
And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards.
How extraordinarily dramatic life is!  If I had read all this in a book, Harry, I think I would have wept over it.
Somehow, now that it has happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.
Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my life.
Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been addressed to a dead girl.
Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent people we call the dead?
Sibyl!  Can she feel, or know, or listen?
Oh, Harry, how I loved her once!  It seems years ago to me now.
She was everything to me.
Then came that dreadful night--was it really only last night?--when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke.
She explained it all to me.
It was terribly pathetic.
But I was not moved a bit.
I thought her shallow.
Suddenly something happened that made me afraid.
I can't tell you what it was, but it was terrible.
I said I would go back to her.
I felt I had done wrong.
And now she is dead.
My God!  My God!  Harry, what shall I do?
You don't know the danger I am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight.
She would have done that for me.
She had no right to kill herself.
It was selfish of her."  "My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case and producing a gold-latten matchbox, "the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible interest in life.
If you had married this girl, you would have been wretched.
Of course, you would have treated her kindly.
One can always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing.
But she would have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her.
And when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman's husband has to pay for.
I say nothing about the social mistake, which would have been abject--which, of course, I would not have allowed--but I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute failure."  "I suppose it would," muttered the lad, walking up and down the room and looking horribly pale.
"But I thought it was my duty.
It is not my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right.
I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good resolutions--that they are always made too late.
Mine certainly were."  "Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific laws.
Their origin is pure vanity.
Their result is absolutely _nil_.
They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions that have a certain charm for the weak.
That is all that can be said for them.
They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have no account."  "Harry," cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him, "why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to?
I don't think I am heartless.
Do you?"  "You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian," answered Lord Henry with his sweet melancholy smile.
The lad frowned.
"I don't like that explanation, Harry," he rejoined, "but I am glad you don't think I am heartless.
I am nothing of the kind.
I know I am not.
And yet I must admit that this thing that has happened does not affect me as it should.
It seems to me to be simply like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play.
It has all the terrible beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but by which I have not been wounded."  "It is an interesting question," said Lord Henry, who found an exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad's unconscious egotism, "an extremely interesting question.
I fancy that the true explanation is this:  It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of style.
They affect us just as vulgarity affects us.
They give us an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that.
Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses our lives.
If these elements of beauty are real, the whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect.
Suddenly we find that we are no longer the actors, but the spectators of the play.
Or rather we are both.
We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacle enthralls us.
In the present case, what is it that has really happened?
Some one has killed herself for love of you.
I wish that I had ever had such an experience.
It would have made me in love with love for the rest of my life.
The people who have adored me--there have not been very many, but there have been some--have always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me.
They have become stout and tedious, and when I meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences.
That awful memory of woman!  What a fearful thing it is!  And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals!  One should absorb the colour of life, but one should never remember its details.
Details are always vulgar."  "I must sow poppies in my garden," sighed Dorian.
"There is no necessity," rejoined his companion.
"Life has always poppies in her hands.
Of course, now and then things linger.
I once wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic mourning for a romance that would not die.
Ultimately, however, it did die.
I forget what killed it.
I think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world for me.
That is always a dreadful moment.
It fills one with the terror of eternity.
Well--would you believe it?--a week ago, at Lady Hampshire's, I found myself seated at dinner next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future.
I had buried my romance in a bed of asphodel.
She dragged it out again and assured me that I had spoiled her life.
I am bound to state that she ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety.
But what a lack of taste she showed!  The one charm of the past is that it is the past.
But women never know when the curtain has fallen.
They always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over, they propose to continue it.
If they were allowed their own way, every comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in a farce.
They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of art.
You are more fortunate than I am.
I assure you, Dorian, that not one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you.
Ordinary women always console themselves.
Some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours.
Never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons.
It always means that they have a history.
Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities of their husbands.
They flaunt their conjugal felicity in one's face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins.
Religion consoles some.
Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a woman once told me, and I can quite understand it.
Besides, nothing makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner.
Conscience makes egotists of us all.
Yes; there is really no end to the consolations that women find in modern life.
Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important one."  "What is that, Harry?" said the lad listlessly.
"Oh, the obvious consolation.
Taking some one else's admirer when one loses one's own.
In good society that always whitewashes a woman.
But really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the women one meets!  There is something to me quite beautiful about her death.
I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen.
They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with, such as romance, passion, and love."  "I was terribly cruel to her.
You forget that."  "I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more than anything else.
They have wonderfully primitive instincts.
We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters, all the same.
They love being dominated.
I am sure you were splendid.
I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can fancy how delightful you looked.
And, after all, you said something to me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key to everything."  "What was that, Harry?"  "You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of romance--that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen."  "She will never come to life again now," muttered the lad, burying his face in his hands.
"No, she will never come to life.
She has played her last part.
But you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur.
The girl never really lived, and so she has never really died.
To you at least she was always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare's plays and left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare's music sounded richer and more full of joy.
The moment she touched actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away.
Mourn for Ophelia, if you like.
Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was strangled.
Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of Brabantio died.
But don't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane.
She was less real than they are."  There was a silence.
The evening darkened in the room.
Noiselessly, and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden.
The colours faded wearily out of things.
After some time Dorian Gray looked up.
"You have explained me to myself, Harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief.
"I felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I could not express it to myself.
How well you know me!  But we will not talk again of what has happened.
It has been a marvellous experience.
That is all.
I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous."  "Life has everything in store for you, Dorian.
There is nothing that you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do."  "But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled?
What then?"  "Ah, then," said Lord Henry, rising to go, "then, my dear Dorian, you would have to fight for your victories.
As it is, they are brought to you.
No, you must keep your good looks.
We live in an age that reads too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful.
We cannot spare you.
And now you had better dress and drive down to the club.
We are rather late, as it is."  "I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry.
I feel too tired to eat anything.
What is the number of your sister's box?"  "Twenty-seven, I believe.
It is on the grand tier.
You will see her name on the door.
But I am sorry you won't come and dine."  "I don't feel up to it," said Dorian listlessly.
"But I am awfully obliged to you for all that you have said to me.
You are certainly my best friend.
No one has ever understood me as you have."  "We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian," answered Lord Henry, shaking him by the hand.
"Good-bye.
I shall see you before nine-thirty, I hope.
Remember, Patti is singing."  As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down.
He waited impatiently for him to go.
The man seemed to take an interminable time over everything.
As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back.
No; there was no further change in the picture.
It had received the news of Sibyl Vane's death before he had known of it himself.
It was conscious of the events of life as they occurred.
The vicious cruelty that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was.
Or was it indifferent to results?
Did it merely take cognizance of what passed within the soul?
He wondered, and hoped that some day he would see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he hoped it.
Poor Sibyl!  What a romance it had all been!  She had often mimicked death on the stage.
Then Death himself had touched her and taken her with him.
How had she played that dreadful last scene?
Had she cursed him, as she died?
No; she had died for love of him, and love would always be a sacrament to him now.
She had atoned for everything by the sacrifice she had made of her life.
He would not think any more of what she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the theatre.
When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic figure sent on to the world's stage to show the supreme reality of love.
A wonderful tragic figure?
Tears came to his eyes as he remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy tremulous grace.
He brushed them away hastily and looked again at the picture.
He felt that the time had really come for making his choice.
Or had his choice already been made?
Yes, life had decided that for him--life, and his own infinite curiosity about life.
Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins--he was to have all these things.
The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: that was all.
A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that was in store for the fair face on the canvas.
Once, in boyish mockery of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips that now smiled so cruelly at him.
Morning after morning he had sat before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times.
Was it to alter now with every mood to which he yielded?
Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair?
The pity of it! the pity of it!  For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that existed between him and the picture might cease.
It had changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain unchanged.
And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?
Besides, was it really under his control?
Had it indeed been prayer that had produced the substitution?
Might there not be some curious scientific reason for it all?
If thought could exercise its influence upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon dead and inorganic things?
Nay, without thought or conscious desire, might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity?
But the reason was of no importance.
He would never again tempt by a prayer any terrible power.
If the picture was to alter, it was to alter.
That was all.
Why inquire too closely into it?
For there would be a real pleasure in watching it.
He would be able to follow his mind into its secret places.
This portrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors.
As it had revealed to him his own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul.
And when winter came upon it, he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer.
When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood.
Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade.
Not one pulse of his life would ever weaken.
Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be strong, and fleet, and joyous.
What did it matter what happened to the coloured image on the canvas?
He would be safe.
That was everything.
He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture, smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was already waiting for him.
An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord Henry was leaning over his chair.
As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was shown into the room.
"I am so glad I have found you, Dorian," he said gravely.
"I called last night, and they told me you were at the opera.
Of course, I knew that was impossible.
But I wish you had left word where you had really gone to.
I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy might be followed by another.
I think you might have telegraphed for me when you heard of it first.
I read of it quite by chance in a late edition of _The Globe_ that I picked up at the club.
I came here at once and was miserable at not finding you.
I can't tell you how heart-broken I am about the whole thing.
I know what you must suffer.
But where were you?
Did you go down and see the girl's mother?
For a moment I thought of following you there.
They gave the address in the paper.
Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn't it?
But I was afraid of intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten.
Poor woman!  What a state she must be in!  And her only child, too!  What did she say about it all?"  "My dear Basil, how do I know?" murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass and looking dreadfully bored.
"I was at the opera.
You should have come on there.
I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry's sister, for the first time.
We were in her box.
She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang divinely.
Don't talk about horrid subjects.
If one doesn't talk about a thing, it has never happened.
It is simply expression, as Harry says, that gives reality to things.
I may mention that she was not the woman's only child.
There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe.
But he is not on the stage.
He is a sailor, or something.
And now, tell me about yourself and what you are painting."  "You went to the opera?" said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a strained touch of pain in his voice.
"You went to the opera while Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging?
You can talk to me of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in?
Why, man, there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!"  "Stop, Basil!  I won't hear it!" cried Dorian, leaping to his feet.
"You must not tell me about things.
What is done is done.
What is past is past."  "You call yesterday the past?"  "What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it?
It is only shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion.
A man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a pleasure.
I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions.
I want to use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them."  "Dorian, this is horrible!  Something has changed you completely.
You look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come down to my studio to sit for his picture.
But you were simple, natural, and affectionate then.
You were the most unspoiled creature in the whole world.
Now, I don't know what has come over you.
You talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you.
It is all Harry's influence.
I see that."  The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden.
"I owe a great deal to Harry, Basil," he said at last, "more than I owe to you.
You only taught me to be vain."  "Well, I am punished for that, Dorian--or shall be some day."  "I don't know what you mean, Basil," he exclaimed, turning round.
"I don't know what you want.
What do you want?"  "I want the Dorian Gray I used to paint," said the artist sadly.
"Basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his shoulder, "you have come too late.
Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl Vane had killed herself--"  "Killed herself!  Good heavens! is there no doubt about that?" cried Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.
"My dear Basil!  Surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident?
Of course she killed herself."  The elder man buried his face in his hands.
"How fearful," he muttered, and a shudder ran through him.
"No," said Dorian Gray, "there is nothing fearful about it.
It is one of the great romantic tragedies of the age.
As a rule, people who act lead the most commonplace lives.
They are good husbands, or faithful wives, or something tedious.
You know what I mean--middle-class virtue and all that kind of thing.
How different Sibyl was!  She lived her finest tragedy.
She was always a heroine.
The last night she played--the night you saw her--she acted badly because she had known the reality of love.
When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet might have died.
She passed again into the sphere of art.
There is something of the martyr about her.
Her death has all the pathetic uselessness of martyrdom, all its wasted beauty.
But, as I was saying, you must not think I have not suffered.
If you had come in yesterday at a particular moment--about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to six--you would have found me in tears.
Even Harry, who was here, who brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through.
I suffered immensely.
Then it passed away.
I cannot repeat an emotion.
No one can, except sentimentalists.
And you are awfully unjust, Basil.
You come down here to console me.
That is charming of you.
You find me consoled, and you are furious.
How like a sympathetic person!  You remind me of a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who spent twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance redressed, or some unjust law altered--I forget exactly what it was.
Finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment.
He had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of _ennui_, and became a confirmed misanthrope.
And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to see it from a proper artistic point of view.
Was it not Gautier who used to write about _la consolation des arts_?
I remember picking up a little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that delightful phrase.
Well, I am not like that young man you told me of when we were down at Marlow together, the young man who used to say that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life.
I love beautiful things that one can touch and handle.
Old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp--there is much to be got from all these.
But the artistic temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to me.
To become the spectator of one's own life, as Harry says, is to escape the suffering of life.
I know you are surprised at my talking to you like this.
You have not realized how I have developed.
I was a schoolboy when you knew me.
I am a man now.
I have new passions, new thoughts, new ideas.
I am different, but you must not like me less.
I am changed, but you must always be my friend.
Of course, I am very fond of Harry.
But I know that you are better than he is.
You are not stronger--you are too much afraid of life--but you are better.
And how happy we used to be together!  Don't leave me, Basil, and don't quarrel with me.
I am what I am.
There is nothing more to be said."  The painter felt strangely moved.
The lad was infinitely dear to him, and his personality had been the great turning point in his art.
He could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more.
After all, his indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away.
There was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.
"Well, Dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "I won't speak to you again about this horrible thing, after to-day.
I only trust your name won't be mentioned in connection with it.
The inquest is to take place this afternoon.
Have they summoned you?"  Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at the mention of the word "inquest."  There was something so crude and vulgar about everything of the kind.
"They don't know my name," he answered.
"But surely she did?"  "Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned to any one.
She told me once that they were all rather curious to learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince Charming.
It was pretty of her.
You must do me a drawing of Sibyl, Basil.
I should like to have something more of her than the memory of a few kisses and some broken pathetic words."  "I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you.
But you must come and sit to me yourself again.
I can't get on without you."  "I can never sit to you again, Basil.
It is impossible!" he exclaimed, starting back.
The painter stared at him.
"My dear boy, what nonsense!" he cried.
"Do you mean to say you don't like what I did of you?
Where is it?
Why have you pulled the screen in front of it?
Let me look at it.
It is the best thing I have ever done.
Do take the screen away, Dorian.
It is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that.
I felt the room looked different as I came in."  "My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil.
You don't imagine I let him arrange my room for me?
He settles my flowers for me sometimes--that is all.
No; I did it myself.
The light was too strong on the portrait."  "Too strong!  Surely not, my dear fellow?
It is an admirable place for it.
Let me see it."  And Hallward walked towards the corner of the room.
A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray's lips, and he rushed between the painter and the screen.
"Basil," he said, looking very pale, "you must not look at it.
I don't wish you to."  "Not look at my own work!  You are not serious.
Why shouldn't I look at it?" exclaimed Hallward, laughing.
"If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never speak to you again as long as I live.
I am quite serious.
I don't offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any.
But, remember, if you touch this screen, everything is over between us."  Hallward was thunderstruck.
He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute amazement.
He had never seen him like this before.
The lad was actually pallid with rage.
His hands were clenched, and the pupils of his eyes were like disks of blue fire.
He was trembling all over.
"Dorian!"  "Don't speak!"  "But what is the matter?
Of course I won't look at it if you don't want me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over towards the window.
"But, really, it seems rather absurd that I shouldn't see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in Paris in the autumn.
I shall probably have to give it another coat of varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"  "To exhibit it!  You want to exhibit it?" exclaimed Dorian Gray, a strange sense of terror creeping over him.
Was the world going to be shown his secret?
Were people to gape at the mystery of his life?
That was impossible.
Something--he did not know what--had to be done at once.
"Yes; I don't suppose you will object to that.
Georges Petit is going to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de Seze, which will open the first week in October.
The portrait will only be away a month.
I should think you could easily spare it for that time.
In fact, you are sure to be out of town.
And if you keep it always behind a screen, you can't care much about it."  Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead.
There were beads of perspiration there.
He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible danger.
"You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he cried.
"Why have you changed your mind?
You people who go in for being consistent have just as many moods as others have.
The only difference is that your moods are rather meaningless.
You can't have forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would induce you to send it to any exhibition.
You told Harry exactly the same thing." He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into his eyes.
He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half seriously and half in jest, "If you want to have a strange quarter of an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won't exhibit your picture.
He told me why he wouldn't, and it was a revelation to me."  Yes, perhaps Basil, too, had his secret.
He would ask him and try.
"Basil," he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in the face, "we have each of us a secret.
Let me know yours, and I shall tell you mine.
What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my picture?"  The painter shuddered in spite of himself.
"Dorian, if I told you, you might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me.
I could not bear your doing either of those two things.
If you wish me never to look at your picture again, I am content.
I have always you to look at.
If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden from the world, I am satisfied.
Your friendship is dearer to me than any fame or reputation."  "No, Basil, you must tell me," insisted Dorian Gray.
"I think I have a right to know."  His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity had taken its place.
He was determined to find out Basil Hallward's mystery.
"Let us sit down, Dorian," said the painter, looking troubled.
"Let us sit down.
And just answer me one question.
Have you noticed in the picture something curious?--something that probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"  "Basil!" cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.
"I see you did.
Don't speak.
Wait till you hear what I have to say.
Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most extraordinary influence over me.
I was dominated, soul, brain, and power, by you.
You became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream.
I worshipped you.
I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke.
I wanted to have you all to myself.
I was only happy when I was with you.
When you were away from me, you were still present in my art....
Of course, I never let you know anything about this.
It would have been impossible.
You would not have understood it.
I hardly understood it myself.
I only knew that I had seen perfection face to face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes--too wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the peril of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them....
Weeks and weeks went on, and I grew more and more absorbed in you.
Then came a new development.
I had drawn you as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman's cloak and polished boar-spear.
Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow of Adrian's barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile.
You had leaned over the still pool of some Greek woodland and seen in the water's silent silver the marvel of your own face.
And it had all been what art should be--unconscious, ideal, and remote.
One day, a fatal day I sometimes think, I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are, not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own time.
Whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of your own personality, thus directly presented to me without mist or veil, I cannot tell.
But I know that as I worked at it, every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret.
I grew afraid that others would know of my idolatry.
I felt, Dorian, that I had told too much, that I had put too much of myself into it.
Then it was that I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited.
You were a little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant to me.
Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me.
But I did not mind that.
When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt that I was right....
Well, after a few days the thing left my studio, and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that I had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking and that I could paint.
Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever really shown in the work one creates.
Art is always more abstract than we fancy.
Form and colour tell us of form and colour--that is all.
It often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely than it ever reveals him.
And so when I got this offer from Paris, I determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.
It never occurred to me that you would refuse.
I see now that you were right.
The picture cannot be shown.
You must not be angry with me, Dorian, for what I have told you.
As I said to Harry, once, you are made to be worshipped."  Dorian Gray drew a long breath.
The colour came back to his cheeks, and a smile played about his lips.
The peril was over.
He was safe for the time.
Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend.
Lord Henry had the charm of being very dangerous.
But that was all.
He was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of.
Would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange idolatry?
Was that one of the things that life had in store?
"It is extraordinary to me, Dorian," said Hallward, "that you should have seen this in the portrait.
Did you really see it?"  "I saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed to me very curious."  "Well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"  Dorian shook his head.
"You must not ask me that, Basil.
I could not possibly let you stand in front of that picture."  "You will some day, surely?"  "Never."  "Well, perhaps you are right.
And now good-bye, Dorian.
You have been the one person in my life who has really influenced my art.
Whatever I have done that is good, I owe to you.
Ah! you don't know what it cost me to tell you all that I have told you."  "My dear Basil," said Dorian, "what have you told me?
Simply that you felt that you admired me too much.
That is not even a compliment."  "It was not intended as a compliment.
It was a confession.
Now that I have made it, something seems to have gone out of me.
Perhaps one should never put one's worship into words."  "It was a very disappointing confession."  "Why, what did you expect, Dorian?
You didn't see anything else in the picture, did you?
There was nothing else to see?"  "No; there was nothing else to see.
Why do you ask?
But you mustn't talk about worship.
It is foolish.
You and I are friends, Basil, and we must always remain so."  "You have got Harry," said the painter sadly.
"Oh, Harry!" cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter.
"Harry spends his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is improbable.
Just the sort of life I would like to lead.
But still I don't think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble.
I would sooner go to you, Basil."  "You will sit to me again?"  "Impossible!"  "You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian.
No man comes across two ideal things.
Few come across one."  "I can't explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again.
There is something fatal about a portrait.
It has a life of its own.
I will come and have tea with you.
That will be just as pleasant."  "Pleasanter for you, I am afraid," murmured Hallward regretfully.
"And now good-bye.
I am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once again.
But that can't be helped.
I quite understand what you feel about it."  As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself.
Poor Basil!  How little he knew of the true reason!  And how strange it was that, instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend!  How much that strange confession explained to him!  The painter's absurd fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curious reticences--he understood them all now, and he felt sorry.
There seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured by romance.
He sighed and touched the bell.
The portrait must be hidden away at all costs.
He could not run such a risk of discovery again.
It had been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour, in a room to which any of his friends had access.
When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if he had thought of peering behind the screen.
The man was quite impassive and waited for his orders.
Dorian lit a cigarette and walked over to the glass and glanced into it.
He could see the reflection of Victor's face perfectly.
It was like a placid mask of servility.
There was nothing to be afraid of, there.
Yet he thought it best to be on his guard.
Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to send two of his men round at once.
It seemed to him that as the man left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen.
Or was that merely his own fancy?
After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs.
Leaf bustled into the library.
He asked her for the key of the schoolroom.
"The old schoolroom, Mr. Dorian?" she exclaimed.
"Why, it is full of dust.
I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it.
It is not fit for you to see, sir.
It is not, indeed."  "I don't want it put straight, Leaf.
I only want the key."  "Well, sir, you'll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it.
Why, it hasn't been opened for nearly five years--not since his lordship died."  He winced at the mention of his grandfather.
He had hateful memories of him.
"That does not matter," he answered.
"I simply want to see the place--that is all.
Give me the key."  "And here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over the contents of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands.
"Here is the key.
I'll have it off the bunch in a moment.
But you don't think of living up there, sir, and you so comfortable here?"  "No, no," he cried petulantly.
"Thank you, Leaf.
That will do."  She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of the household.
He sighed and told her to manage things as she thought best.
She left the room, wreathed in smiles.
As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round the room.
His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna.
Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in.
It had perhaps served often as a pall for the dead.
Now it was to hide something that had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death itself--something that would breed horrors and yet would never die.
What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image on the canvas.
They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace.
They would defile it and make it shameful.
And yet the thing would still live on.
It would be always alive.
He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away.
Basil would have helped him to resist Lord Henry's influence, and the still more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament.
The love that he bore him--for it was really love--had nothing in it that was not noble and intellectual.
It was not that mere physical admiration of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire.
It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself.
Yes, Basil could have saved him.
But it was too late now.
The past could always be annihilated.
Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that.
But the future was inevitable.
There were passions in him that would find their terrible outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.
He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen.
Was the face on the canvas viler than before?
It seemed to him that it was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified.
Gold hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips--they all were there.
It was simply the expression that had altered.
That was horrible in its cruelty.
Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil's reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!--how shallow, and of what little account!  His own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and calling him to judgement.
A look of pain came across him, and he flung the rich pall over the picture.
As he did so, a knock came to the door.
He passed out as his servant entered.
"The persons are here, Monsieur."  He felt that the man must be got rid of at once.
He must not be allowed to know where the picture was being taken to.
There was something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes.
Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.
"Wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in here."  In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant.
Mr. Hubbard was a florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the artists who dealt with him.
As a rule, he never left his shop.
He waited for people to come to him.
But he always made an exception in favour of Dorian Gray.
There was something about Dorian that charmed everybody.
It was a pleasure even to see him.
"What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?" he said, rubbing his fat freckled hands.
"I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in person.
I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir.
Picked it up at a sale.
Old Florentine.
Came from Fonthill, I believe.
Admirably suited for a religious subject, Mr. Gray."  "I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr. Hubbard.
I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame--though I don't go in much at present for religious art--but to-day I only want a picture carried to the top of the house for me.
It is rather heavy, so I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men."  "No trouble at all, Mr. Gray.
I am delighted to be of any service to you.
Which is the work of art, sir?"  "This," replied Dorian, moving the screen back.
"Can you move it, covering and all, just as it is?
I don't want it to get scratched going upstairs."  "There will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker, beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from the long brass chains by which it was suspended.
"And, now, where shall we carry it to, Mr. Gray?"  "I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me.
Or perhaps you had better go in front.
I am afraid it is right at the top of the house.
We will go up by the front staircase, as it is wider."  He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and began the ascent.
The elaborate character of the frame had made the picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman's spirited dislike of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it so as to help them.
"Something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they reached the top landing.
And he wiped his shiny forehead.
"I am afraid it is rather heavy," murmured Dorian as he unlocked the door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.
He had not entered the place for more than four years--not, indeed, since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then as a study when he grew somewhat older.
It was a large, well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and desired to keep at a distance.
It appeared to Dorian to have but little changed.
There was the huge Italian _cassone_, with its fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as a boy.
There the satinwood book-case filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks.
On the wall behind it was hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists.
How well he remembered it all!  Every moment of his lonely childhood came back to him as he looked round.
He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden away.
How little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in store for him!  But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as this.
He had the key, and no one else could enter it.
Beneath its purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden, and unclean.
What did it matter?
No one could see it.
He himself would not see it.
Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his soul?
He kept his youth--that was enough.
And, besides, might not his nature grow finer, after all?
There was no reason that the future should be so full of shame.
Some love might come across his life, and purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spirit and in flesh--those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm.
Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward's masterpiece.
No; that was impossible.
Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing upon the canvas was growing old.
It might escape the hideousness of sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it.
The cheeks would become hollow or flaccid.
Yellow crow's feet would creep round the fading eyes and make them horrible.
The hair would lose its brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of old men are.
There would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood.
The picture had to be concealed.
There was no help for it.
"Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard, please," he said, wearily, turning round.
"I am sorry I kept you so long.
I was thinking of something else."  "Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Gray," answered the frame-maker, who was still gasping for breath.
"Where shall we put it, sir?"  "Oh, anywhere.
Here:  this will do.
I don't want to have it hung up.
Just lean it against the wall.
Thanks."  "Might one look at the work of art, sir?"  Dorian started.
"It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard," he said, keeping his eye on the man.
He felt ready to leap upon him and fling him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that concealed the secret of his life.
"I shan't trouble you any more now.
I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round."  "Not at all, not at all, Mr. Gray.
Ever ready to do anything for you, sir." And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant, who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough uncomely face.
He had never seen any one so marvellous.
When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door and put the key in his pocket.
He felt safe now.
No one would ever look upon the horrible thing.
No eye but his would ever see his shame.
On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o'clock and that the tea had been already brought up.
On a little table of dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady Radley, his guardian's wife, a pretty professional invalid who had spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from Lord Henry, and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn and the edges soiled.
A copy of the third edition of _The St. James's Gazette_ had been placed on the tea-tray.
It was evident that Victor had returned.
He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.
He would be sure to miss the picture--had no doubt missed it already, while he had been laying the tea-things.
The screen had not been set back, and a blank space was visible on the wall.
Perhaps some night he might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the room.
It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one's house.
He had heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower or a shred of crumpled lace.
He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry's note.
It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper, and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at eight-fifteen.
He opened _The St. James's_ languidly, and looked through it.
A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye.
It drew attention to the following paragraph:   INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.--An inquest was held this morning at the Bell Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre, Holborn.
A verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of Dr. Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.
He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and flung the pieces away.
How ugly it all was!  And how horribly real ugliness made things!  He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for having sent him the report.
And it was certainly stupid of him to have marked it with red pencil.
Victor might have read it.
The man knew more than enough English for that.
Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something.
And, yet, what did it matter?
What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane's death?
There was nothing to fear.
Dorian Gray had not killed her.
His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him.
What was it, he wondered.
He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves.
After a few minutes he became absorbed.
It was the strangest book that he had ever read.
It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb show before him.
Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly made real to him.
Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually revealed.
It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being, indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin.
The style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid and obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technical expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work of some of the finest artists of the French school of _Symbolistes_.
There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in colour.
The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical philosophy.
One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the spiritual ecstasies of some mediaeval saint or the morbid confessions of a modern sinner.
It was a poisonous book.
The heavy odour of incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain.
The mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the falling day and creeping shadows.
Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed through the windows.
He read on by its wan light till he could read no more.
Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his bedside and began to dress for dinner.
It was almost nine o'clock before he reached the club, where he found Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.
"I am so sorry, Harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely your fault.
That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the time was going."  "Yes, I thought you would like it," replied his host, rising from his chair.
"I didn't say I liked it, Harry.
I said it fascinated me.
There is a great difference."  "Ah, you have discovered that?" murmured Lord Henry.
And they passed into the dining-room.
For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of this book.
Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never sought to free himself from it.
He procured from Paris no less than nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have almost entirely lost control.
The hero, the wonderful young Parisian in whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.
And, indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own life, written before he had lived it.
In one point he was more fortunate than the novel's fantastic hero.
He never knew--never, indeed, had any cause to know--that somewhat grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still water which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently, been so remarkable.
It was with an almost cruel joy--and perhaps in nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its place--that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he had most dearly valued.
For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and many others besides him, seemed never to leave him.
Even those who had heard the most evil things against him--and from time to time strange rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the chatter of the clubs--could not believe anything to his dishonour when they saw him.
He had always the look of one who had kept himself unspotted from the world.
Men who talked grossly became silent when Dorian Gray entered the room.
There was something in the purity of his face that rebuked them.
His mere presence seemed to recall to them the memory of the innocence that they had tarnished.
They wondered how one so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an age that was at once sordid and sensual.
Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him from the polished glass.
The very sharpness of the contrast used to quicken his sense of pleasure.
He grew more and more enamoured of his own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age.
He would place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture, and smile.
He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.
There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant because it was purely selfish.
But moments such as these were rare.
That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase with gratification.
The more he knew, the more he desired to know.
He had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.
Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to society.
Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art.
His little dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited, as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver.
Indeed, there were many, especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw, in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and perfect manner of a citizen of the world.
To them he seemed to be of the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to "make themselves perfect by the worship of beauty."  Like Gautier, he was one for whom "the visible world existed."  And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.
Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for him.
His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.
For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be something more than a mere _arbiter elegantiarum_, to be consulted on the wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a cane.
He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.
The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.
But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the dominant characteristic.
As he looked back upon man moving through history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss.
So much had been surrendered! and to such little purpose!  There had been mad wilful rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance, they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.
Yes:  there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival.
It was to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any mode of passionate experience.
Its aim, indeed, was to be experience itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might be.
Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing.
But it was to teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is itself but a moment.
There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques, and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled with the malady of reverie.
Gradually white fingers creep through the curtains, and they appear to tremble.
In black fantastic shapes, dumb shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there.
Outside, there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from her purple cave.
Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern.
The wan mirrors get back their mimic life.
The flameless tapers stand where we had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.
Nothing seems to us changed.
Out of the unreal shadows of the night comes back the real life that we had known.
We have to resume it where we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate, in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.
It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that, indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition of it.
It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman Catholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great attraction for him.
The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it sought to symbolize.
He loved to kneel down on the cold marble pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the "_panis caelestis_," the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the Passion of Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his breast for his sins.
The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their subtle fascination for him.
As he passed out, he used to look with wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of one of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn grating the true story of their lives.
But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which there are no stars and the moon is in travail.
Mysticism, with its marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of the _Darwinismus_ movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions, morbid or healthy, normal or diseased.
Yet, as has been said of him before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance compared with life itself.
He felt keenly conscious of how barren all intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.
He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual mysteries to reveal.
And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums from the East.
He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one's passions, and in violets that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers; of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to be able to expel melancholy from the soul.
At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while grinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes of reed or brass and charmed--or feigned to charm--great hooded snakes and horrible horned adders.
The harsh intervals and shrill discords of barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert's grace, and Chopin's beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell unheeded on his ear.
He collected together from all parts of the world the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them.
He had the mysterious _juruparis_ of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and the sonorous green jaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular sweetness.
He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when they were shaken; the long _clarin_ of the Mexicans, into which the performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the harsh _ture_ of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a distance of three leagues; the _teponaztli_, that has two vibrating tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the _yotl_-bells of the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexican temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a description.
The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous voices.
Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his box at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in rapt pleasure to "Tannhauser" and seeing in the prelude to that great work of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.
On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered with five hundred and sixty pearls.
This taste enthralled him for years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him.
He would often spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver, the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes, carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their alternate layers of ruby and sapphire.
He loved the red gold of the sunstone, and the moonstone's pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow of the milky opal.
He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise _de la vieille roche_ that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.
He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels.
In Alphonso's Clericalis Disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real jacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander, the Conqueror of Emathia was said to have found in the vale of Jordan snakes "with collars of real emeralds growing on their backs." There was a gem in the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition of golden letters and a scarlet robe" the monster could be thrown into a magical sleep and slain.
According to the great alchemist, Pierre de Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India made him eloquent.
The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine.
The garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her colour.
The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus, that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison.
The bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm that could cure the plague.
In the nests of Arabian birds was the aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any danger by fire.
The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand, as the ceremony of his coronation.
The gates of the palace of John the Priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within." Over the gable were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night.
In Lodge's strange romance 'A Margarite of America', it was stated that in the chamber of the queen one could behold "all the chaste ladies of the world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults." Marco Polo had seen the inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the mouths of the dead.
A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven moons over its loss.
When the Huns lured the king into the great pit, he flung it away--Procopius tells the story--nor was it ever found again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of gold pieces for it.
The King of Malabar had shown to a certain Venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he worshipped.
When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI, visited Louis XII of France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to Brantome, and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great light.
Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and twenty-one diamonds.
Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty thousand marks, which was covered with balas rubies.
Hall described Henry VIII, on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as wearing "a jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses." The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold filigrane.
Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold armour studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parseme_ with pearls.
Henry II wore jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients.
The ducal hat of Charles the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.
How exquisite life had once been!  How gorgeous in its pomp and decoration!  Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.
Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern nations of Europe.
As he investigated the subject--and he always had an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment in whatever he took up--he was almost saddened by the reflection of the ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things.
He, at any rate, had escaped that.
Summer followed summer, and the yellow jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the story of their shame, but he was unchanged.
No winter marred his face or stained his flowerlike bloom.
How different it was with material things!  Where had they passed to?
Where was the great crocus-coloured robe, on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked by brown girls for the pleasure of Athena?
Where the huge velarium that Nero had stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail of purple on which was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds?
He longed to see the curious table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which were displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast; the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of Pontus and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters--all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature"; and the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "_Madame, je suis tout joyeux_," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four pearls.
He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the king's arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked in gold."  Catherine de Medicis had a mourning-bed made for her of black velvet powdered with crescents and suns.
Its curtains were of damask, with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver ground, and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it stood in a room hung with rows of the queen's devices in cut black velvet upon cloth of silver.
Louis XIV had gold embroidered caryatides fifteen feet high in his apartment.
The state bed of Sobieski, King of Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with verses from the Koran.
Its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully chased, and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions.
It had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of Mohammed had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.
And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and stitched over with iridescent beetles' wings; the Dacca gauzes, that from their transparency are known in the East as "woven air," and "running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from Java; elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair blue silks and wrought with _fleurs-de-lis_, birds and images; veils of _lacis_ worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese _Foukousas_, with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.
He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed he had for everything connected with the service of the Church.
In the long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain.
He possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask, figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls.
The orphreys were divided into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood.
This was Italian work of the fifteenth century.
Another cope was of green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves, from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals.
The morse bore a seraph's head in gold-thread raised work.
The orphreys were woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian.
He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins and _fleurs-de-lis_; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria.
In the mystic offices to which such things were put, there was something that quickened his imagination.
For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times to be almost too great to be borne.
Upon the walls of the lonely locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the purple-and-gold pall as a curtain.
For weeks he would not go there, would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart, his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence.
Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day, until he was driven away.
On his return he would sit in front of the picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other times, with that pride of individualism that is half the fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.
After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more than once spent the winter.
He hated to be separated from the picture that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.
He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing.
It was true that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn from that?
He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him.
He had not painted it.
What was it to him how vile and full of shame it looked?
Even if he told them, would they believe it?
Yet he was afraid.
Sometimes when he was down at his great house in Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not been tampered with and that the picture was still there.
What if it should be stolen?
The mere thought made him cold with horror.
Surely the world would know his secret then.
Perhaps the world already suspected it.
For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him.
He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out.
Curious stories became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year.
It was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade.
His extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though they were determined to discover his secret.
Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice, and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about him.
It was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him.
Women who had wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.
Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his strange and dangerous charm.
His great wealth was a certain element of security.
Society--civilized society, at least--is never very ready to believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and fascinating.
It feels instinctively that manners are of more importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability is of much less value than the possession of a good _chef_.
And, after all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life.
Even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold _entrees_, as Lord Henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is possibly a good deal to be said for his view.
For the canons of good society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art.
Form is absolutely essential to it.
It should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us.
Is insincerity such a terrible thing?
I think not.
It is merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.
Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray's opinion.
He used to wonder at the shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence.
To him, man was a being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies of the dead.
He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose blood flowed in his veins.
Here was Philip Herbert, described by Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, as one who was "caressed by the Court for his handsome face, which kept him not long company."  Was it young Herbert's life that he sometimes led?
Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body to body till it had reached his own?
Was it some dim sense of that ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause, give utterance, in Basil Hallward's studio, to the mad prayer that had so changed his life?
Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood Sir Anthony Sherard, with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet.
What had this man's legacy been?
Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him some inheritance of sin and shame?
Were his own actions merely the dreams that the dead man had not dared to realize?
Here, from the fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.
A flower was in her right hand, and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses.
On a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple.
There were large green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes.
He knew her life, and the strange stories that were told about her lovers.
Had he something of her temperament in him?
These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to look curiously at him.
What of George Willoughby, with his powdered hair and fantastic patches?
How evil he looked!  The face was saturnine and swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with disdain.
Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that were so overladen with rings.
He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth century, and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars.
What of the second Lord Beckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his wildest days, and one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs.
Fitzherbert?
How proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls and insolent pose!  What passions had he bequeathed?
The world had looked upon him as infamous.
He had led the orgies at Carlton House.
The star of the Garter glittered upon his breast.
Beside him hung the portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black.
Her blood, also, stirred within him.
How curious it all seemed!  And his mother with her Lady Hamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips--he knew what he had got from her.
He had got from her his beauty, and his passion for the beauty of others.
She laughed at him in her loose Bacchante dress.
There were vine leaves in her hair.
The purple spilled from the cup she was holding.
The carnations of the painting had withered, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and brilliancy of colour.
They seemed to follow him wherever he went.
Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one's own race, nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious.
There were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it had been in his brain and in his passions.
He felt that he had known them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of subtlety.
It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had been his own.
The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had himself known this curious fancy.
In the seventh he tells how, crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible _taedium vitae_, that comes on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.
Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made monstrous or mad:  Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and painted her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death from the dead thing he fondled; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as Paul the Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of Formosus, and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was bought at the price of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used hounds to chase living men and whose murdered body was covered with roses by a harlot who had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse, with Fratricide riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood of Perotto; Pietro Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, child and minion of Sixtus IV, whose beauty was equalled only by his debauchery, and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy that he might serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine--the son of the Fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when gambling with him for his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery took the name of Innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of three lads was infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the lover of Isotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome as the enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and gave poison to Ginevra d'Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles VI, who had so wildly adored his brother's wife that a leper had warned him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his brain had sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by Saracen cards painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in his trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, Grifonetto Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and Simonetto with his page, and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow piazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep, and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.
There was a horrible fascination in them all.
He saw them at night, and they troubled his imagination in the day.
The Renaissance knew of strange manners of poisoning--poisoning by a helmet and a lighted torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander and by an amber chain.
Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book.
There were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he could realize his conception of the beautiful.
It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.
He was walking home about eleven o'clock from Lord Henry's, where he had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold and foggy.
At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of his grey ulster turned up.
He had a bag in his hand.
Dorian recognized him.
It was Basil Hallward.
A strange sense of fear, for which he could not account, came over him.
He made no sign of recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.
But Hallward had seen him.
Dorian heard him first stopping on the pavement and then hurrying after him.
In a few moments, his hand was on his arm.
"Dorian!  What an extraordinary piece of luck!  I have been waiting for you in your library ever since nine o'clock.
Finally I took pity on your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out.
I am off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see you before I left.
I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as you passed me.
But I wasn't quite sure.
Didn't you recognize me?"  "In this fog, my dear Basil?
Why, I can't even recognize Grosvenor Square.
I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don't feel at all certain about it.
I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seen you for ages.
But I suppose you will be back soon?"  "No:  I am going to be out of England for six months.
I intend to take a studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great picture I have in my head.
However, it wasn't about myself I wanted to talk.
Here we are at your door.
Let me come in for a moment.
I have something to say to you."  "I shall be charmed.
But won't you miss your train?" said Dorian Gray languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his latch-key.
The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his watch.
"I have heaps of time," he answered.
"The train doesn't go till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven.
In fact, I was on my way to the club to look for you, when I met you.
You see, I shan't have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things.
All I have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes."  Dorian looked at him and smiled.
"What a way for a fashionable painter to travel!  A Gladstone bag and an ulster!  Come in, or the fog will get into the house.
And mind you don't talk about anything serious.
Nothing is serious nowadays.
At least nothing should be."  Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the library.
There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth.
The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little marqueterie table.
"You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian.
He gave me everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes.
He is a most hospitable creature.
I like him much better than the Frenchman you used to have.
What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?"  Dorian shrugged his shoulders.
"I believe he married Lady Radley's maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker.
Anglomania is very fashionable over there now, I hear.
It seems silly of the French, doesn't it?
But--do you know?--he was not at all a bad servant.
I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about.
One often imagines things that are quite absurd.
He was really very devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away.
Have another brandy-and-soda?
Or would you like hock-and-seltzer?
I always take hock-and-seltzer myself.
There is sure to be some in the next room."  "Thanks, I won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the corner.
"And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously.
Don't frown like that.
You make it so much more difficult for me."  "What is it all about?" cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging himself down on the sofa.
"I hope it is not about myself.
I am tired of myself to-night.
I should like to be somebody else."  "It is about yourself," answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, "and I must say it to you.
I shall only keep you half an hour."  Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette.
"Half an hour!" he murmured.
"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own sake that I am speaking.
I think it right that you should know that the most dreadful things are being said against you in London."  "I don't wish to know anything about them.
I love scandals about other people, but scandals about myself don't interest me.
They have not got the charm of novelty."  "They must interest you, Dorian.
Every gentleman is interested in his good name.
You don't want people to talk of you as something vile and degraded.
Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all that kind of thing.
But position and wealth are not everything.
Mind you, I don't believe these rumours at all.
At least, I can't believe them when I see you.
Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man's face.
It cannot be concealed.
People talk sometimes of secret vices.
There are no such things.
If a wretched man has a vice, it shows itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the moulding of his hands even.
Somebody--I won't mention his name, but you know him--came to me last year to have his portrait done.
I had never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the time, though I have heard a good deal since.
He offered an extravagant price.
I refused him.
There was something in the shape of his fingers that I hated.
I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied about him.
His life is dreadful.
But you, Dorian, with your pure, bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth--I can't believe anything against you.
And yet I see you very seldom, and you never come down to the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I hear all these hideous things that people are whispering about you, I don't know what to say.
Why is it, Dorian, that a man like the Duke of Berwick leaves the room of a club when you enter it?
Why is it that so many gentlemen in London will neither go to your house or invite you to theirs?
You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley.
I met him at dinner last week.
Your name happened to come up in conversation, in connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the Dudley.
Staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the same room with.
I reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked him what he meant.
He told me.
He told me right out before everybody.
It was horrible!  Why is your friendship so fatal to young men?
There was that wretched boy in the Guards who committed suicide.
You were his great friend.
There was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England with a tarnished name.
You and he were inseparable.
What about Adrian Singleton and his dreadful end?
What about Lord Kent's only son and his career?
I met his father yesterday in St. James's Street.
He seemed broken with shame and sorrow.
What about the young Duke of Perth?
What sort of life has he got now?
What gentleman would associate with him?"  "Stop, Basil.
You are talking about things of which you know nothing," said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt in his voice.
"You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it.
It is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows anything about mine.
With such blood as he has in his veins, how could his record be clean?
You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth.
Did I teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery?
If Kent's silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me?
If Adrian Singleton writes his friend's name across a bill, am I his keeper?
I know how people chatter in England.
The middle classes air their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with the people they slander.
In this country, it is enough for a man to have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.
And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead themselves?
My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land of the hypocrite."  "Dorian," cried Hallward, "that is not the question.
England is bad enough I know, and English society is all wrong.
That is the reason why I want you to be fine.
You have not been fine.
One has a right to judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends.
Yours seem to lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity.
You have filled them with a madness for pleasure.
They have gone down into the depths.
You led them there.
Yes:  you led them there, and yet you can smile, as you are smiling now.
And there is worse behind.
I know you and Harry are inseparable.
Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should not have made his sister's name a by-word."  "Take care, Basil.
You go too far."  "I must speak, and you must listen.
You shall listen.
When you met Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her.
Is there a single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the park?
Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her.
Then there are other stories--stories that you have been seen creeping at dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest dens in London.
Are they true?
Can they be true?
When I first heard them, I laughed.
I hear them now, and they make me shudder.
What about your country-house and the life that is led there?
Dorian, you don't know what is said about you.
I won't tell you that I don't want to preach to you.
I remember Harry saying once that every man who turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by saying that, and then proceeded to break his word.
I do want to preach to you.
I want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect you.
I want you to have a clean name and a fair record.
I want you to get rid of the dreadful people you associate with.
Don't shrug your shoulders like that.
Don't be so indifferent.
You have a wonderful influence.
Let it be for good, not for evil.
They say that you corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow after.
I don't know whether it is so or not.
How should I know?
But it is said of you.
I am told things that it seems impossible to doubt.
Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford.
He showed me a letter that his wife had written to him when she was dying alone in her villa at Mentone.
Your name was implicated in the most terrible confession I ever read.
I told him that it was absurd--that I knew you thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind.
Know you?
I wonder do I know you?
Before I could answer that, I should have to see your soul."  "To see my soul!" muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and turning almost white from fear.
"Yes," answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his voice, "to see your soul.
But only God can do that."  A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man.
"You shall see it yourself, to-night!" he cried, seizing a lamp from the table.
"Come:  it is your own handiwork.
Why shouldn't you look at it?
You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose.
Nobody would believe you.
If they did believe you, they would like me all the better for it.
I know the age better than you do, though you will prate about it so tediously.
Come, I tell you.
You have chattered enough about corruption.
Now you shall look on it face to face."  There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered.
He stamped his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner.
He felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret, and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous memory of what he had done.
"Yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into his stern eyes, "I shall show you my soul.
You shall see the thing that you fancy only God can see."  Hallward started back.
"This is blasphemy, Dorian!" he cried.
"You must not say things like that.
They are horrible, and they don't mean anything."  "You think so?"  He laughed again.
"I know so.
As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your good.
You know I have been always a stanch friend to you."  "Don't touch me.
Finish what you have to say."  A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter's face.
He paused for a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him.
After all, what right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray?
If he had done a tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered! Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their throbbing cores of flame.
"I am waiting, Basil," said the young man in a hard clear voice.
He turned round.
"What I have to say is this," he cried.
"You must give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against you.
If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, I shall believe you.
Deny them, Dorian, deny them!  Can't you see what I am going through?
My God! don't tell me that you are bad, and corrupt, and shameful."  Dorian Gray smiled.
There was a curl of contempt in his lips.
"Come upstairs, Basil," he said quietly.
"I keep a diary of my life from day to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written.
I shall show it to you if you come with me."  "I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it.
I see I have missed my train.
That makes no matter.
I can go to-morrow.
But don't ask me to read anything to-night.
All I want is a plain answer to my question."  "That shall be given to you upstairs.
I could not give it here.
You will not have to read long."      He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward following close behind.
They walked softly, as men do instinctively at night.
The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase.
A rising wind made some of the windows rattle.
When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock.
"You insist on knowing, Basil?" he asked in a low voice.
"Yes."  "I am delighted," he answered, smiling.
Then he added, somewhat harshly, "You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know everything about me.
You have had more to do with my life than you think"; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.
A cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in a flame of murky orange.
He shuddered.
"Shut the door behind you," he whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.
Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression.
The room looked as if it had not been lived in for years.
A faded Flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost empty book-case--that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a table.
As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered with dust and that the carpet was in holes.
A mouse ran scuffling behind the wainscoting.
There was a damp odour of mildew.
"So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil?
Draw that curtain back, and you will see mine."  The voice that spoke was cold and cruel.
"You are mad, Dorian, or playing a part," muttered Hallward, frowning.
"You won't?
Then I must do it myself," said the young man, and he tore the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.
An exclamation of horror broke from the painter's lips as he saw in the dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him.
There was something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray's own face that he was looking at! The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that marvellous beauty.
There was still some gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual mouth.
The sodden eyes had kept something of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat.
Yes, it was Dorian himself.
But who had done it?
He seemed to recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design.
The idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid.
He seized the lighted candle, and held it to the picture.
In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long letters of bright vermilion.
It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire.
He had never done that.
Still, it was his own picture.
He knew it, and he felt as if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice.
His own picture!  What did it mean?
Why had it altered?
He turned and looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man.
His mouth twitched, and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate.
He passed his hand across his forehead.
It was dank with clammy sweat.
The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting.
There was neither real sorrow in it nor real joy.
There was simply the passion of the spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes.
He had taken the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.
"What does this mean?" cried Hallward, at last.
His own voice sounded shrill and curious in his ears.
"Years ago, when I was a boy," said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my good looks.
One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me that revealed to me the wonder of beauty.
In a mad moment that, even now, I don't know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps you would call it a prayer...."  "I remember it!  Oh, how well I remember it!  No! the thing is impossible.
The room is damp.
Mildew has got into the canvas.
The paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them.
I tell you the thing is impossible."  "Ah, what is impossible?" murmured the young man, going over to the window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.
"You told me you had destroyed it."  "I was wrong.
It has destroyed me."  "I don't believe it is my picture."  "Can't you see your ideal in it?" said Dorian bitterly.
"My ideal, as you call it..."  "As you called it."  "There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful.
You were to me such an ideal as I shall never meet again.
This is the face of a satyr."  "It is the face of my soul."  "Christ! what a thing I must have worshipped!  It has the eyes of a devil."  "Each of us has heaven and hell in him, Basil," cried Dorian with a wild gesture of despair.
Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it.
"My God!  If it is true," he exclaimed, "and this is what you have done with your life, why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you to be!" He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it.
The surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it.
It was from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come.
Through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were slowly eating the thing away.
The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave was not so fearful.
His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and lay there sputtering.
He placed his foot on it and put it out.
Then he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table and buried his face in his hands.
"Good God, Dorian, what a lesson!  What an awful lesson!" There was no answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window.
"Pray, Dorian, pray," he murmured.
"What is it that one was taught to say in one's boyhood?
'Lead us not into temptation.
Forgive us our sins.
Wash away our iniquities.'  Let us say that together.
The prayer of your pride has been answered.
The prayer of your repentance will be answered also.
I worshipped you too much.
I am punished for it.
You worshipped yourself too much.
We are both punished."  Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed eyes.
"It is too late, Basil," he faltered.
"It is never too late, Dorian.
Let us kneel down and try if we cannot remember a prayer.
Isn't there a verse somewhere, 'Though your sins be as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow'?"  "Those words mean nothing to me now."  "Hush!  Don't say that.
You have done enough evil in your life.
My God!  Don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?"  Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him, as though it had been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his ear by those grinning lips.
The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table, more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything.
He glanced wildly around.
Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that faced him.
His eye fell on it.
He knew what it was.
It was a knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord, and had forgotten to take away with him.
He moved slowly towards it, passing Hallward as he did so.
As soon as he got behind him, he seized it and turned round.
Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going to rise.
He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind the ear, crushing the man's head down on the table and stabbing again and again.
There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking with blood.
Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively, waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air.
He stabbed him twice more, but the man did not move.
Something began to trickle on the floor.
He waited for a moment, still pressing the head down.
Then he threw the knife on the table, and listened.
He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet.
He opened the door and went out on the landing.
The house was absolutely quiet.
No one was about.
For a few seconds he stood bending over the balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness.
Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in as he did so.
The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms.
Had it not been for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was simply asleep.
How quickly it had all been done!  He felt strangely calm, and walking over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony.
The wind had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock's tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes.
He looked down and saw the policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on the doors of the silent houses.
The crimson spot of a prowling hansom gleamed at the corner and then vanished.
A woman in a fluttering shawl was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went.
Now and then she stopped and peered back.
Once, she began to sing in a hoarse voice.
The policeman strolled over and said something to her.
She stumbled away, laughing.
A bitter blast swept across the square.
The gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their black iron branches to and fro.
He shivered and went back, closing the window behind him.
Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it.
He did not even glance at the murdered man.
He felt that the secret of the whole thing was not to realize the situation.
The friend who had painted the fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his life.
That was enough.
Then he remembered the lamp.
It was a rather curious one of Moorish workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished steel, and studded with coarse turquoises.
Perhaps it might be missed by his servant, and questions would be asked.
He hesitated for a moment, then he turned back and took it from the table.
He could not help seeing the dead thing.
How still it was!  How horribly white the long hands looked!  It was like a dreadful wax image.
Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs.
The woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain.
He stopped several times and waited.
No:  everything was still.
It was merely the sound of his own footsteps.
When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner.
They must be hidden away somewhere.
He unlocked a secret press that was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious disguises, and put them into it.
He could easily burn them afterwards.
Then he pulled out his watch.
It was twenty minutes to two.
He sat down and began to think.
Every year--every month, almost--men were strangled in England for what he had done.
There had been a madness of murder in the air.
Some red star had come too close to the earth....
And yet, what evidence was there against him?
Basil Hallward had left the house at eleven.
No one had seen him come in again.
Most of the servants were at Selby Royal.
His valet had gone to bed....
Paris!  Yes.
It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as he had intended.
With his curious reserved habits, it would be months before any suspicions would be roused.
Months!  Everything could be destroyed long before then.
A sudden thought struck him.
He put on his fur coat and hat and went out into the hall.
There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the bull's-eye reflected in the window.
He waited and held his breath.
After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting the door very gently behind him.
Then he began ringing the bell.
In about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very drowsy.
"I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis," he said, stepping in; "but I had forgotten my latch-key.
What time is it?"  "Ten minutes past two, sir," answered the man, looking at the clock and blinking.
"Ten minutes past two?
How horribly late!  You must wake me at nine to-morrow.
I have some work to do."  "All right, sir."  "Did any one call this evening?"  "Mr. Hallward, sir.
He stayed here till eleven, and then he went away to catch his train."  "Oh!  I am sorry I didn't see him.
Did he leave any message?"  "No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did not find you at the club."  "That will do, Francis.
Don't forget to call me at nine to-morrow."  "No, sir."  The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.
Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the library.
For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room, biting his lip and thinking.
Then he took down the Blue Book from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.
"Alan Campbell, 152, Hertford Street, Mayfair."  Yes; that was the man he wanted.
At nine o'clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters.
Dorian was sleeping quite peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his cheek.
He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.
The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he had been lost in some delightful dream.
Yet he had not dreamed at all.
His night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain.
But youth smiles without any reason.
It is one of its chiefest charms.
He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his chocolate.
The mellow November sun came streaming into the room.
The sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air.
It was almost like a morning in May.
Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent, blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there with terrible distinctness.
He winced at the memory of all that he had suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came back to him, and he grew cold with passion.
The dead man was still sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now.
How horrible that was! Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.
He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken or grow mad.
There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the senses.
But this was not one of them.
It was a thing to be driven out of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might strangle one itself.
When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once.
He spent a long time also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence.
At some of the letters, he smiled.
Three of them bored him.
One he read several times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his face.
"That awful thing, a woman's memory!" as Lord Henry had once said.
After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the table, sat down and wrote two letters.
One he put in his pocket, the other he handed to the valet.
"Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell is out of town, get his address."  As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and then human faces.
Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward.
He frowned, and getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.
He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.
When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page of the book.
It was Gautier's Emaux et Camees, Charpentier's Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching.
The binding was of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted pomegranates.
It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton.
As he turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand "_du supplice encore mal lavee_," with its downy red hairs and its "_doigts de faune_."  He glanced at his own white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice:       Sur une gamme chromatique,        Le sein de perles ruisselant,      La Venus de l'Adriatique        Sort de l'eau son corps rose et blanc.
Les domes, sur l'azur des ondes        Suivant la phrase au pur contour,      S'enflent comme des gorges rondes        Que souleve un soupir d'amour.
L'esquif aborde et me depose,        Jetant son amarre au pilier,      Devant une facade rose,        Sur le marbre d'un escalier.
How exquisite they were!  As one read them, one seemed to be floating down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains.
The mere lines looked to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as one pushes out to the Lido.
The sudden flashes of colour reminded him of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through the dim, dust-stained arcades.
Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he kept saying over and over to himself:       "Devant une facade rose,         Sur le marbre d'un escalier."  The whole of Venice was in those two lines.
He remembered the autumn that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to mad delightful follies.
There was romance in every place.
But Venice, like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true romantic, background was everything, or almost everything.
Basil had been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret.
Poor Basil!  What a horrible way for a man to die!  He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget.
He read of the swallows that fly in and out of the little _cafe_ at Smyrna where the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot, lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "_monstre charmant_" that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre.
But after a time the book fell from his hand.
He grew nervous, and a horrible fit of terror came over him.
What if Alan Campbell should be out of England?
Days would elapse before he could come back.
Perhaps he might refuse to come.
What could he do then?
Every moment was of vital importance.
They had been great friends once, five years before--almost inseparable, indeed.
Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end.
When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled:  Alan Campbell never did.
He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian.
His dominant intellectual passion was for science.
At Cambridge he had spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year.
Indeed, he was still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions.
He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs.
In fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray together--music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he wished--and, indeed, exercised often without being conscious of it.
They had met at Lady Berkshire's the night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on.
For eighteen months their intimacy lasted.
Campbell was always either at Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square.
To him, as to many others, Dorian Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in life.
Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one ever knew.
But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any party at which Dorian Gray was present.
He had changed, too--was strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time left in which to practise.
And this was certainly true.
Every day he seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain curious experiments.
This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for.
Every second he kept glancing at the clock.
As the minutes went by he became horribly agitated.
At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room, looking like a beautiful caged thing.
He took long stealthy strides.
His hands were curiously cold.
The suspense became unbearable.
Time seemed to him to be crawling with feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice.
He knew what was waiting for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight and driven the eyeballs back into their cave.
It was useless.
The brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain, danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving masks.
Then, suddenly, time stopped for him.
Yes:  that blind, slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its grave, and showed it to him.
He stared at it.
Its very horror made him stone.
At last the door opened and his servant entered.
He turned glazed eyes upon him.
"Mr. Campbell, sir," said the man.
A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back to his cheeks.
"Ask him to come in at once, Francis."  He felt that he was himself again.
His mood of cowardice had passed away.
The man bowed and retired.
In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in, looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.
"Alan!  This is kind of you.
I thank you for coming."  "I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray.
But you said it was a matter of life and death."  His voice was hard and cold.
He spoke with slow deliberation.
There was a look of contempt in the steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian.
He kept his hands in the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the gesture with which he had been greeted.
"Yes:  it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one person.
Sit down."  Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him.
The two men's eyes met.
In Dorian's there was infinite pity.
He knew that what he was going to do was dreadful.
After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he had sent for, "Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table.
He has been dead ten hours now.
Don't stir, and don't look at me like that.
Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do not concern you.
What you have to do is this--"  "Stop, Gray.
I don't want to know anything further.
Whether what you have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me.
I entirely decline to be mixed up in your life.
Keep your horrible secrets to yourself.
They don't interest me any more."  "Alan, they will have to interest you.
This one will have to interest you.
I am awfully sorry for you, Alan.
But I can't help myself.
You are the one man who is able to save me.
I am forced to bring you into the matter.
I have no option.
Alan, you are scientific.
You know about chemistry and things of that kind.
You have made experiments.
What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs--to destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left.
Nobody saw this person come into the house.
Indeed, at the present moment he is supposed to be in Paris.
He will not be missed for months.
When he is missed, there must be no trace of him found here.
You, Alan, you must change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that I may scatter in the air."  "You are mad, Dorian."  "Ah!  I was waiting for you to call me Dorian."  "You are mad, I tell you--mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to help you, mad to make this monstrous confession.
I will have nothing to do with this matter, whatever it is.
Do you think I am going to peril my reputation for you?
What is it to me what devil's work you are up to?"  "It was suicide, Alan."  "I am glad of that.
But who drove him to it?
You, I should fancy."  "Do you still refuse to do this for me?"  "Of course I refuse.
I will have absolutely nothing to do with it.
I don't care what shame comes on you.
You deserve it all.
I should not be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced.
How dare you ask me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror?
I should have thought you knew more about people's characters.
Your friend Lord Henry Wotton can't have taught you much about psychology, whatever else he has taught you.
Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you.
You have come to the wrong man.
Go to some of your friends.
Don't come to me."  "Alan, it was murder.
I killed him.
You don't know what he had made me suffer.
Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or the marring of it than poor Harry has had.
He may not have intended it, the result was the same."  "Murder!  Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to?
I shall not inform upon you.
It is not my business.
Besides, without my stirring in the matter, you are certain to be arrested.
Nobody ever commits a crime without doing something stupid.
But I will have nothing to do with it."  "You must have something to do with it.
Wait, wait a moment; listen to me.
Only listen, Alan.
All I ask of you is to perform a certain scientific experiment.
You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the horrors that you do there don't affect you.
If in some hideous dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject.
You would not turn a hair.
You would not believe that you were doing anything wrong.
On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind.
What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before.
Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are accustomed to work at.
And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence against me.
If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be discovered unless you help me."  "I have no desire to help you.
You forget that.
I am simply indifferent to the whole thing.
It has nothing to do with me."  "Alan, I entreat you.
Think of the position I am in.
Just before you came I almost fainted with terror.
You may know terror yourself some day.
No! don't think of that.
Look at the matter purely from the scientific point of view.
You don't inquire where the dead things on which you experiment come from.
Don't inquire now.
I have told you too much as it is.
But I beg of you to do this.
We were friends once, Alan."  "Don't speak about those days, Dorian--they are dead."  "The dead linger sometimes.
The man upstairs will not go away.
He is sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms.
Alan! Alan!  If you don't come to my assistance, I am ruined.
Why, they will hang me, Alan!  Don't you understand?
They will hang me for what I have done."  "There is no good in prolonging this scene.
I absolutely refuse to do anything in the matter.
It is insane of you to ask me."  "You refuse?"  "Yes."  "I entreat you, Alan."  "It is useless."  The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray's eyes.
Then he stretched out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it.
He read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the table.
Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.
Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and opened it.
As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell back in his chair.
A horrible sense of sickness came over him.
He felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.
After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.
"I am so sorry for you, Alan," he murmured, "but you leave me no alternative.
I have a letter written already.
Here it is.
You see the address.
If you don't help me, I must send it.
If you don't help me, I will send it.
You know what the result will be.
But you are going to help me.
It is impossible for you to refuse now.
I tried to spare you.
You will do me the justice to admit that.
You were stern, harsh, offensive.
You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat me--no living man, at any rate.
I bore it all.
Now it is for me to dictate terms."  Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him.
"Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan.
You know what they are.
The thing is quite simple.
Come, don't work yourself into this fever.
The thing has to be done.
Face it, and do it."  A groan broke from Campbell's lips and he shivered all over.
The ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be borne.
He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already come upon him.
The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead.
It was intolerable.
It seemed to crush him.
"Come, Alan, you must decide at once."  "I cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter things.
"You must.
You have no choice.
Don't delay."  He hesitated a moment.
"Is there a fire in the room upstairs?"  "Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos."  "I shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory."  "No, Alan, you must not leave the house.
Write out on a sheet of notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the things back to you."  Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope to his assistant.
Dorian took the note up and read it carefully.
Then he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as soon as possible and to bring the things with him.
As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece.
He was shivering with a kind of ague.
For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke.
A fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was like the beat of a hammer.
As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears.
There was something in the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him.
"You are infamous, absolutely infamous!" he muttered.
"Hush, Alan.
You have saved my life," said Dorian.
"Your life?
Good heavens! what a life that is!  You have gone from corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime.
In doing what I am going to do--what you force me to do--it is not of your life that I am thinking."  "Ah, Alan," murmured Dorian with a sigh, "I wish you had a thousandth part of the pity for me that I have for you." He turned away as he spoke and stood looking out at the garden.
Campbell made no answer.
After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.
"Shall I leave the things here, sir?" he asked Campbell.
"Yes," said Dorian.
"And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another errand for you.
What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies Selby with orchids?"  "Harden, sir."  "Yes--Harden.
You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered, and to have as few white ones as possible.
In fact, I don't want any white ones.
It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty place--otherwise I wouldn't bother you about it."  "No trouble, sir.
At what time shall I be back?"  Dorian looked at Campbell.
"How long will your experiment take, Alan?" he said in a calm indifferent voice.
The presence of a third person in the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.
Campbell frowned and bit his lip.
"It will take about five hours," he answered.
"It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven, Francis.
Or stay:  just leave my things out for dressing.
You can have the evening to yourself.
I am not dining at home, so I shall not want you."  "Thank you, sir," said the man, leaving the room.
"Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost.
How heavy this chest is! I'll take it for you.
You bring the other things."  He spoke rapidly and in an authoritative manner.
Campbell felt dominated by him.
They left the room together.
When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned it in the lock.
Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his eyes.
He shuddered.
"I don't think I can go in, Alan," he murmured.
"It is nothing to me.
I don't require you," said Campbell coldly.
Dorian half opened the door.
As he did so, he saw the face of his portrait leering in the sunlight.
On the floor in front of it the torn curtain was lying.
He remembered that the night before he had forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas, and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.
What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood?
How horrible it was!--more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.
He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man.
Then, stooping down and taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the picture.
There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him.
He heard Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other things that he had required for his dreadful work.
He began to wonder if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had thought of each other.
"Leave me now," said a stern voice behind him.
He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a glistening yellow face.
As he was going downstairs, he heard the key being turned in the lock.
It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library.
He was pale, but absolutely calm.
"I have done what you asked me to do," he muttered.
"And now, good-bye.
Let us never see each other again."  "You have saved me from ruin, Alan.
I cannot forget that," said Dorian simply.
As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs.
There was a horrible smell of nitric acid in the room.
But the thing that had been sitting at the table was gone.
That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady Narborough's drawing-room by bowing servants.
His forehead was throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his manner as he bent over his hostess's hand was as easy and graceful as ever.
Perhaps one never seems so much at one's ease as when one has to play a part.
Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any tragedy of our age.
Those finely shaped fingers could never have clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God and goodness.
He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life.
It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the remains of really remarkable ugliness.
She had proved an excellent wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed, and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery, and French _esprit_ when she could get it.
Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life.
"I know, my dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you," she used to say, "and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake.
It is most fortunate that you were not thought of at the time.
As it was, our bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody.
However, that was all Narborough's fault.
He was dreadfully short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who never sees anything."  Her guests this evening were rather tedious.
The fact was, as she explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her.
"I think it is most unkind of her, my dear," she whispered.
"Of course I go and stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake them up.
You don't know what an existence they lead down there.
It is pure unadulterated country life.
They get up early, because they have so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to think about.
There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep after dinner.
You shan't sit next either of them.
You shall sit by me and amuse me."  Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room.
Yes: it was certainly a tedious party.
Two of the people he had never seen before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies, but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against her; Mrs.
Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess's daughter, a dowdy dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked, white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of ideas.
He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed:  "How horrid of Henry Wotton to be so late!  I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised faithfully not to disappoint me."  It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.
But at dinner he could not eat anything.
Plate after plate went away untasted.
Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called "an insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you," and now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence and abstracted manner.
From time to time the butler filled his glass with champagne.
He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.
"Dorian," said Lord Henry at last, as the _chaud-froid_ was being handed round, "what is the matter with you to-night?
You are quite out of sorts."  "I believe he is in love," cried Lady Narborough, "and that he is afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous.
He is quite right.
I certainly should."  "Dear Lady Narborough," murmured Dorian, smiling, "I have not been in love for a whole week--not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left town."  "How you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady.
"I really cannot understand it."  "It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry.
"She is the one link between us and your short frocks."  "She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry.
But I remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how _decolletee_ she was then."  "She is still _decolletee_," he answered, taking an olive in his long fingers; "and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an _edition de luxe_ of a bad French novel.
She is really wonderful, and full of surprises.
Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary.
When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief."  "How can you, Harry!" cried Dorian.
"It is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess.
"But her third husband, Lord Henry!  You don't mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?"  "Certainly, Lady Narborough."  "I don't believe a word of it."  "Well, ask Mr. Gray.
He is one of her most intimate friends."  "Is it true, Mr. Gray?"  "She assures me so, Lady Narborough," said Dorian.
"I asked her whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and hung at her girdle.
She told me she didn't, because none of them had had any hearts at all."  "Four husbands!  Upon my word that is _trop de zele_."  "_Trop d'audace_, I tell her," said Dorian.
"Oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear.
And what is Ferrol like?
I don't know him."  "The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes," said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.
Lady Narborough hit him with her fan.
"Lord Henry, I am not at all surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked."  "But what world says that?" asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows.
"It can only be the next world.
This world and I are on excellent terms."  "Everybody I know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady, shaking her head.
Lord Henry looked serious for some moments.
"It is perfectly monstrous," he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays saying things against one behind one's back that are absolutely and entirely true."  "Isn't he incorrigible?" cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.
"I hope so," said his hostess, laughing.
"But really, if you all worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry again so as to be in the fashion."  "You will never marry again, Lady Narborough," broke in Lord Henry.
"You were far too happy.
When a woman marries again, it is because she detested her first husband.
When a man marries again, it is because he adored his first wife.
Women try their luck; men risk theirs."  "Narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady.
"If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," was the rejoinder.
"Women love us for our defects.
If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything, even our intellects.
You will never ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough, but it is quite true."  "Of course it is true, Lord Henry.
If we women did not love you for your defects, where would you all be?
Not one of you would ever be married.
You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors.
Not, however, that that would alter you much.
Nowadays all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men."  "_Fin de siecle_," murmured Lord Henry.
"_Fin du globe_," answered his hostess.
"I wish it were _fin du globe_," said Dorian with a sigh.
"Life is a great disappointment."  "Ah, my dear," cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, "don't tell me that you have exhausted life.
When a man says that one knows that life has exhausted him.
Lord Henry is very wicked, and I sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good--you look so good.
I must find you a nice wife.
Lord Henry, don't you think that Mr. Gray should get married?"  "I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry with a bow.
"Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him.
I shall go through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the eligible young ladies."  "With their ages, Lady Narborough?" asked Dorian.
"Of course, with their ages, slightly edited.
But nothing must be done in a hurry.
I want it to be what _The Morning Post_ calls a suitable alliance, and I want you both to be happy."  "What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!" exclaimed Lord Henry.
"A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love her."  "Ah! what a cynic you are!" cried the old lady, pushing back her chair and nodding to Lady Ruxton.
"You must come and dine with me soon again.
You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir Andrew prescribes for me.
You must tell me what people you would like to meet, though.
I want it to be a delightful gathering."  "I like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered.
"Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?"  "I fear so," she said, laughing, as she stood up.
"A thousand pardons, my dear Lady Ruxton," she added, "I didn't see you hadn't finished your cigarette."  "Never mind, Lady Narborough.
I smoke a great deal too much.
I am going to limit myself, for the future."  "Pray don't, Lady Ruxton," said Lord Henry.
"Moderation is a fatal thing.
Enough is as bad as a meal.
More than enough is as good as a feast."  Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously.
"You must come and explain that to me some afternoon, Lord Henry.
It sounds a fascinating theory," she murmured, as she swept out of the room.
"Now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal," cried Lady Narborough from the door.
"If you do, we are sure to squabble upstairs."  The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the table and came up to the top.
Dorian Gray changed his seat and went and sat by Lord Henry.
Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about the situation in the House of Commons.
He guffawed at his adversaries.
The word _doctrinaire_--word full of terror to the British mind--reappeared from time to time between his explosions.
An alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory.
He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought.
The inherited stupidity of the race--sound English common sense he jovially termed it--was shown to be the proper bulwark for society.
A smile curved Lord Henry's lips, and he turned round and looked at Dorian.
"Are you better, my dear fellow?" he asked.
"You seemed rather out of sorts at dinner."  "I am quite well, Harry.
I am tired.
That is all."  "You were charming last night.
The little duchess is quite devoted to you.
She tells me she is going down to Selby."  "She has promised to come on the twentieth."  "Is Monmouth to be there, too?"  "Oh, yes, Harry."  "He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her.
She is very clever, too clever for a woman.
She lacks the indefinable charm of weakness.
It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image precious.
Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.
White porcelain feet, if you like.
They have been through the fire, and what fire does not destroy, it hardens.
She has had experiences."  "How long has she been married?" asked Dorian.
"An eternity, she tells me.
I believe, according to the peerage, it is ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity, with time thrown in.
Who else is coming?"  "Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess, Geoffrey Clouston, the usual set.
I have asked Lord Grotrian."  "I like him," said Lord Henry.
"A great many people don't, but I find him charming.
He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by being always absolutely over-educated.
He is a very modern type."  "I don't know if he will be able to come, Harry.
He may have to go to Monte Carlo with his father."  "Ah! what a nuisance people's people are!  Try and make him come.
By the way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night.
You left before eleven.
What did you do afterwards?
Did you go straight home?"  Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.
"No, Harry," he said at last, "I did not get home till nearly three."  "Did you go to the club?"  "Yes," he answered.
Then he bit his lip.
"No, I don't mean that.
I didn't go to the club.
I walked about.
I forget what I did....
How inquisitive you are, Harry!  You always want to know what one has been doing.
I always want to forget what I have been doing.
I came in at half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time.
I had left my latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in.
If you want any corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."  Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"My dear fellow, as if I cared! Let us go up to the drawing-room.
No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman.
Something has happened to you, Dorian.
Tell me what it is.
You are not yourself to-night."  "Don't mind me, Harry.
I am irritable, and out of temper.
I shall come round and see you to-morrow, or next day.
Make my excuses to Lady Narborough.
I shan't go upstairs.
I shall go home.
I must go home."  "All right, Dorian.
I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time.
The duchess is coming."  "I will try to be there, Harry," he said, leaving the room.
As he drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him.
Lord Henry's casual questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted his nerve still.
Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed.
He winced.
He hated the idea of even touching them.
Yet it had to be done.
He realized that, and when he had locked the door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had thrust Basil Hallward's coat and bag.
A huge fire was blazing.
He piled another log on it.
The smell of the singeing clothes and burning leather was horrible.
It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume everything.
At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some Algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.
Suddenly he started.
His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed nervously at his underlip.
Between two of the windows stood a large Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue lapis.
He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet almost loathed.
His breath quickened.
A mad craving came over him.
He lit a cigarette and then threw it away.
His eyelids drooped till the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek.
But he still watched the cabinet.
At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring.
A triangular drawer passed slowly out.
His fingers moved instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something.
It was a small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads.
He opened it.
Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and persistent.
He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his face.
Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock.
It was twenty minutes to twelve.
He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did so, and went into his bedroom.
As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray, dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept quietly out of his house.
In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good horse.
He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.
The man shook his head.
"It is too far for me," he muttered.
"Here is a sovereign for you," said Dorian.
"You shall have another if you drive fast."  "All right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in an hour," and after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly towards the river.
A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly in the dripping mist.
The public-houses were just closing, and dim men and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors.
From some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter.
In others, drunkards brawled and screamed.
Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said to him on the first day they had met, "To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul."  Yes, that was the secret.
He had often tried it, and would try it again now.
There were opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were new.
The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull.
From time to time a huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it.
The gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy.
Once the man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile.
A steam rose from the horse as it splashed up the puddles.
The sidewindows of the hansom were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.
"To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul!"  How the words rang in his ears!  His soul, certainly, was sick to death.
Was it true that the senses could cure it?
Innocent blood had been spilled.
What could atone for that?
Ah! for that there was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one.
Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done?
Who had made him a judge over others?
He had said things that were dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.
On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each step.
He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster.
The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him.
His throat burned and his delicate hands twitched nervously together.
He struck at the horse madly with his stick.
The driver laughed and whipped up.
He laughed in answer, and the man was silent.
The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some sprawling spider.
The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist thickened, he felt afraid.
Then they passed by lonely brickfields.
The fog was lighter here, and he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange, fanlike tongues of fire.
A dog barked as they went by, and far away in the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed.
The horse stumbled in a rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.
After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over rough-paven streets.
Most of the windows were dark, but now and then fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind.
He watched them curiously.
They moved like monstrous marionettes and made gestures like live things.
He hated them.
A dull rage was in his heart.
As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards.
The driver beat at them with his whip.
It is said that passion makes one think in a circle.
Certainly with hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would still have dominated his temper.
From cell to cell of his brain crept the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all man's appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre.
Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real, became dear to him now for that very reason.
Ugliness was the one reality.
The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song.
They were what he needed for forgetfulness.
In three days he would be free.
Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane.
Over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black masts of ships.
Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the yards.
"Somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?" he asked huskily through the trap.
Dorian started and peered round.
"This will do," he answered, and having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay.
Here and there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman.
The light shook and splintered in the puddles.
A red glare came from an outward-bound steamer that was coaling.
The slimy pavement looked like a wet mackintosh.
He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he was being followed.
In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories.
In one of the top-windows stood a lamp.
He stopped and gave a peculiar knock.
After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being unhooked.
The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the shadow as he passed.
At the end of the hall hung a tattered green curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him in from the street.
He dragged it aside and entered a long low room which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon.
Shrill flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that faced them, were ranged round the walls.
Greasy reflectors of ribbed tin backed them, making quivering disks of light.
The floor was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud, and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor.
Some Malays were crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and showing their white teeth as they chattered.
In one corner, with his head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat with an expression of disgust.
"He thinks he's got red ants on him," laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by.
The man looked at her in terror and began to whimper.
At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a darkened chamber.
As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the heavy odour of opium met him.
He heaved a deep breath, and his nostrils quivered with pleasure.
When he entered, a young man with smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.
"You here, Adrian?" muttered Dorian.
"Where else should I be?" he answered, listlessly.
"None of the chaps will speak to me now."  "I thought you had left England."  "Darlington is not going to do anything.
My brother paid the bill at last.
George doesn't speak to me either....
I don't care," he added with a sigh.
"As long as one has this stuff, one doesn't want friends.
I think I have had too many friends."  Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses.
The twisted limbs, the gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him.
He knew in what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were teaching them the secret of some new joy.
They were better off than he was.
He was prisoned in thought.
Memory, like a horrible malady, was eating his soul away.
From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of Basil Hallward looking at him.
Yet he felt he could not stay.
The presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him.
He wanted to be where no one would know who he was.
He wanted to escape from himself.
"I am going on to the other place," he said after a pause.
"On the wharf?"  "Yes."  "That mad-cat is sure to be there.
They won't have her in this place now."  Dorian shrugged his shoulders.
"I am sick of women who love one.
Women who hate one are much more interesting.
Besides, the stuff is better."  "Much the same."  "I like it better.
Come and have something to drink.
I must have something."  "I don't want anything," murmured the young man.
"Never mind."  Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar.
A half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of them.
The women sidled up and began to chatter.
Dorian turned his back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.
A crooked smile, like a Malay crease, writhed across the face of one of the women.
"We are very proud to-night," she sneered.
"For God's sake don't talk to me," cried Dorian, stamping his foot on the ground.
"What do you want?
Money?
Here it is.
Don't ever talk to me again."  Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman's sodden eyes, then flickered out and left them dull and glazed.
She tossed her head and raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers.
Her companion watched her enviously.
"It's no use," sighed Adrian Singleton.
"I don't care to go back.
What does it matter?
I am quite happy here."  "You will write to me if you want anything, won't you?" said Dorian, after a pause.
"Perhaps."  "Good night, then."  "Good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping his parched mouth with a handkerchief.
Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face.
As he drew the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the woman who had taken his money.
"There goes the devil's bargain!" she hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.
"Curse you!" he answered, "don't call me that."  She snapped her fingers.
"Prince Charming is what you like to be called, ain't it?" she yelled after him.
The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly round.
The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear.
He rushed out as if in pursuit.
Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain.
His meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult.
He bit his lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad.
Yet, after all, what did it matter to him?
One's days were too brief to take the burden of another's errors on one's shoulders.
Each man lived his own life and paid his own price for living it.
The only pity was one had to pay so often for a single fault.
One had to pay over and over again, indeed.
In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.
There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful impulses.
Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will.
They move to their terrible end as automatons move.
Choice is taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm.
For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are sins of disobedience.
When that high spirit, that morning star of evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.
Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself, he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his throat.
He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the tightening fingers away.
In a second he heard the click of a revolver, and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head, and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.
"What do you want?" he gasped.
"Keep quiet," said the man.
"If you stir, I shoot you."  "You are mad.
What have I done to you?"  "You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane," was the answer, "and Sibyl Vane was my sister.
She killed herself.
I know it.
Her death is at your door.
I swore I would kill you in return.
For years I have sought you.
I had no clue, no trace.
The two people who could have described you were dead.
I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call you.
I heard it to-night by chance.
Make your peace with God, for to-night you are going to die."  Dorian Gray grew sick with fear.
"I never knew her," he stammered.
"I never heard of her.
You are mad."  "You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you are going to die."  There was a horrible moment.
Dorian did not know what to say or do.
"Down on your knees!" growled the man.
"I give you one minute to make your peace--no more.
I go on board to-night for India, and I must do my job first.
One minute.
That's all."  Dorian's arms fell to his side.
Paralysed with terror, he did not know what to do.
Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain.
"Stop," he cried.
"How long ago is it since your sister died?
Quick, tell me!"  "Eighteen years," said the man.
"Why do you ask me?
What do years matter?"  "Eighteen years," laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph in his voice.
"Eighteen years!  Set me under the lamp and look at my face!"  James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant.
Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.
Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the unstained purity of youth.
He seemed little more than a lad of twenty summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been when they had parted so many years ago.
It was obvious that this was not the man who had destroyed her life.
He loosened his hold and reeled back.
"My God! my God!" he cried, "and I would have murdered you!"  Dorian Gray drew a long breath.
"You have been on the brink of committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly.
"Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own hands."  "Forgive me, sir," muttered James Vane.
"I was deceived.
A chance word I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track."  "You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into trouble," said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the street.
James Vane stood on the pavement in horror.
He was trembling from head to foot.
After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him with stealthy footsteps.
He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked round with a start.
It was one of the women who had been drinking at the bar.
"Why didn't you kill him?" she hissed out, putting haggard face quite close to his.
"I knew you were following him when you rushed out from Daly's.
You fool!  You should have killed him.
He has lots of money, and he's as bad as bad."  "He is not the man I am looking for," he answered, "and I want no man's money.
I want a man's life.
The man whose life I want must be nearly forty now.
This one is little more than a boy.
Thank God, I have not got his blood upon my hands."  The woman gave a bitter laugh.
"Little more than a boy!" she sneered.
"Why, man, it's nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me what I am."  "You lie!" cried James Vane.
She raised her hand up to heaven.
"Before God I am telling the truth," she cried.
"Before God?"  "Strike me dumb if it ain't so.
He is the worst one that comes here.
They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face.
It's nigh on eighteen years since I met him.
He hasn't changed much since then.
I have, though," she added, with a sickly leer.
"You swear this?"  "I swear it," came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth.
"But don't give me away to him," she whined; "I am afraid of him.
Let me have some money for my night's lodging."  He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street, but Dorian Gray had disappeared.
When he looked back, the woman had vanished also.
A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband, a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests.
It was tea-time, and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at which the duchess was presiding.
Her white hands were moving daintily among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that Dorian had whispered to her.
Lord Henry was lying back in a silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them.
On a peach-coloured divan sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke's description of the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection.
Three young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of the women.
The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were more expected to arrive on the next day.
"What are you two talking about?" said Lord Henry, strolling over to the table and putting his cup down.
"I hope Dorian has told you about my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys.
It is a delightful idea."  "But I don't want to be rechristened, Harry," rejoined the duchess, looking up at him with her wonderful eyes.
"I am quite satisfied with my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his."  "My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world.
They are both perfect.
I was thinking chiefly of flowers.
Yesterday I cut an orchid, for my button-hole.
It was a marvellous spotted thing, as effective as the seven deadly sins.
In a thoughtless moment I asked one of the gardeners what it was called.
He told me it was a fine specimen of _Robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind.
It is a sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things.
Names are everything.
I never quarrel with actions.
My one quarrel is with words.
That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in literature.
The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled to use one.
It is the only thing he is fit for."  "Then what should we call you, Harry?" she asked.
"His name is Prince Paradox," said Dorian.
"I recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess.
"I won't hear of it," laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair.
"From a label there is no escape!  I refuse the title."  "Royalties may not abdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips.
"You wish me to defend my throne, then?"  "Yes."  "I give the truths of to-morrow."  "I prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered.
"You disarm me, Gladys," he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.
"Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear."  "I never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wave of his hand.
"That is your error, Harry, believe me.
You value beauty far too much."  "How can you say that?
I admit that I think that it is better to be beautiful than to be good.
But on the other hand, no one is more ready than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly."  "Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?" cried the duchess.
"What becomes of your simile about the orchid?"  "Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys.
You, as a good Tory, must not underrate them.
Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly virtues have made our England what she is."  "You don't like your country, then?" she asked.
"I live in it."  "That you may censure it the better."  "Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?" he inquired.
"What do they say of us?"  "That Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop."  "Is that yours, Harry?"  "I give it to you."  "I could not use it.
It is too true."  "You need not be afraid.
Our countrymen never recognize a description."  "They are practical."  "They are more cunning than practical.
When they make up their ledger, they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy."  "Still, we have done great things."  "Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys."  "We have carried their burden."  "Only as far as the Stock Exchange."  She shook her head.
"I believe in the race," she cried.
"It represents the survival of the pushing."  "It has development."  "Decay fascinates me more."  "What of art?" she asked.
"It is a malady."  "Love?"  "An illusion."  "Religion?"  "The fashionable substitute for belief."  "You are a sceptic."  "Never!  Scepticism is the beginning of faith."  "What are you?"  "To define is to limit."  "Give me a clue."  "Threads snap.
You would lose your way in the labyrinth."  "You bewilder me.
Let us talk of some one else."  "Our host is a delightful topic.
Years ago he was christened Prince Charming."  "Ah! don't remind me of that," cried Dorian Gray.
"Our host is rather horrid this evening," answered the duchess, colouring.
"I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern butterfly."  "Well, I hope he won't stick pins into you, Duchess," laughed Dorian.
"Oh! my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with me."  "And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?"  "For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you.
Usually because I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by half-past eight."  "How unreasonable of her!  You should give her warning."  "I daren't, Mr. Gray.
Why, she invents hats for me.
You remember the one I wore at Lady Hilstone's garden-party?
You don't, but it is nice of you to pretend that you do.
Well, she made it out of nothing.
All good hats are made out of nothing."  "Like all good reputations, Gladys," interrupted Lord Henry.
"Every effect that one produces gives one an enemy.
To be popular one must be a mediocrity."  "Not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women rule the world.
I assure you we can't bear mediocrities.
We women, as some one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if you ever love at all."  "It seems to me that we never do anything else," murmured Dorian.
"Ah! then, you never really love, Mr. Gray," answered the duchess with mock sadness.
"My dear Gladys!" cried Lord Henry.
"How can you say that?
Romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art.
Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved.
Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion.
It merely intensifies it.
We can have in life but one great experience at best, and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as possible."  "Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?" asked the duchess after a pause.
"Especially when one has been wounded by it," answered Lord Henry.
The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression in her eyes.
"What do you say to that, Mr. Gray?" she inquired.
Dorian hesitated for a moment.
Then he threw his head back and laughed.
"I always agree with Harry, Duchess."  "Even when he is wrong?"  "Harry is never wrong, Duchess."  "And does his philosophy make you happy?"  "I have never searched for happiness.
Who wants happiness?
I have searched for pleasure."  "And found it, Mr. Gray?"  "Often.
Too often."  The duchess sighed.
"I am searching for peace," she said, "and if I don't go and dress, I shall have none this evening."  "Let me get you some orchids, Duchess," cried Dorian, starting to his feet and walking down the conservatory.
"You are flirting disgracefully with him," said Lord Henry to his cousin.
"You had better take care.
He is very fascinating."  "If he were not, there would be no battle."  "Greek meets Greek, then?"  "I am on the side of the Trojans.
They fought for a woman."  "They were defeated."  "There are worse things than capture," she answered.
"You gallop with a loose rein."  "Pace gives life," was the _riposte_.
"I shall write it in my diary to-night."  "What?"  "That a burnt child loves the fire."  "I am not even singed.
My wings are untouched."  "You use them for everything, except flight."  "Courage has passed from men to women.
It is a new experience for us."  "You have a rival."  "Who?"  He laughed.
"Lady Narborough," he whispered.
"She perfectly adores him."  "You fill me with apprehension.
The appeal to antiquity is fatal to us who are romanticists."  "Romanticists!  You have all the methods of science."  "Men have educated us."  "But not explained you."  "Describe us as a sex," was her challenge.
"Sphinxes without secrets."  She looked at him, smiling.
"How long Mr. Gray is!" she said.
"Let us go and help him.
I have not yet told him the colour of my frock."  "Ah! you must suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys."  "That would be a premature surrender."  "Romantic art begins with its climax."  "I must keep an opportunity for retreat."  "In the Parthian manner?"  "They found safety in the desert.
I could not do that."  "Women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but hardly had he finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall.
Everybody started up.
The duchess stood motionless in horror.
And with fear in his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.
He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of the sofas.
After a short time, he came to himself and looked round with a dazed expression.
"What has happened?" he asked.
"Oh!  I remember.
Am I safe here, Harry?" He began to tremble.
"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, "you merely fainted.
That was all.
You must have overtired yourself.
You had better not come down to dinner.
I will take your place."  "No, I will come down," he said, struggling to his feet.
"I would rather come down.
I must not be alone."  He went to his room and dressed.
There was a wild recklessness of gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the face of James Vane watching him.
The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet indifferent to life itself.
The consciousness of being hunted, snared, tracked down, had begun to dominate him.
If the tapestry did but tremble in the wind, he shook.
The dead leaves that were blown against the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild regrets.
When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor's face peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to lay its hand upon his heart.
But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him.
Actual life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the imagination.
It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet of sin.
It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen brood.
In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor the good rewarded.
Success was given to the strong, failure thrust upon the weak.
That was all.
Besides, had any stranger been prowling round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the keepers.
Had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the gardeners would have reported it.
Yes, it had been merely fancy.
Sibyl Vane's brother had not come back to kill him.
He had sailed away in his ship to founder in some winter sea.
From him, at any rate, he was safe.
Why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he was.
The mask of youth had saved him.
And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them visible form, and make them move before one!  What sort of life would his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep! As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder.
Oh! in what a wild hour of madness he had killed his friend!  How ghastly the mere memory of the scene!  He saw it all again.
Each hideous detail came back to him with added horror.
Out of the black cave of time, terrible and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin.
When Lord Henry came in at six o'clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will break.
It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out.
There was something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life.
But it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had caused the change.
His own nature had revolted against the excess of anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm.
With subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so.
Their strong passions must either bruise or bend.
They either slay the man, or themselves die.
Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on.
The loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude.
Besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with something of pity and not a little of contempt.
After breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party.
The crisp frost lay like salt upon the grass.
The sky was an inverted cup of blue metal.
A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.
At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoffrey Clouston, the duchess's brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of his gun.
He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered bracken and rough undergrowth.
"Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?" he asked.
"Not very good, Dorian.
I think most of the birds have gone to the open.
I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new ground."  Dorian strolled along by his side.
The keen aromatic air, the brown and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful freedom.
He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the high indifference of joy.
Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it forward, started a hare.
It bolted for a thicket of alders.
Sir Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the animal's grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he cried out at once, "Don't shoot it, Geoffrey.
Let it live."  "What nonsense, Dorian!" laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded into the thicket, he fired.
There were two cries heard, the cry of a hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is worse.
"Good heavens!  I have hit a beater!" exclaimed Sir Geoffrey.
"What an ass the man was to get in front of the guns!  Stop shooting there!" he called out at the top of his voice.
"A man is hurt."  The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.
"Where, sir?
Where is he?" he shouted.
At the same time, the firing ceased along the line.
"Here," answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket.
"Why on earth don't you keep your men back?
Spoiled my shooting for the day."  Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the lithe swinging branches aside.
In a few moments they emerged, dragging a body after them into the sunlight.
He turned away in horror.
It seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went.
He heard Sir Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of the keeper.
The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with faces.
There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of voices.
A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the boughs overhead.
After a few moments--that were to him, in his perturbed state, like endless hours of pain--he felt a hand laid on his shoulder.
He started and looked round.
"Dorian," said Lord Henry, "I had better tell them that the shooting is stopped for to-day.
It would not look well to go on."  "I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry," he answered bitterly.
"The whole thing is hideous and cruel.
Is the man ...?"  He could not finish the sentence.
"I am afraid so," rejoined Lord Henry.
"He got the whole charge of shot in his chest.
He must have died almost instantaneously.
Come; let us go home."  They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly fifty yards without speaking.
Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and said, with a heavy sigh, "It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen."  "What is?" asked Lord Henry.
"Oh! this accident, I suppose.
My dear fellow, it can't be helped.
It was the man's own fault.
Why did he get in front of the guns?
Besides, it is nothing to us.
It is rather awkward for Geoffrey, of course.
It does not do to pepper beaters.
It makes people think that one is a wild shot.
And Geoffrey is not; he shoots very straight.
But there is no use talking about the matter."  Dorian shook his head.
"It is a bad omen, Harry.
I feel as if something horrible were going to happen to some of us.
To myself, perhaps," he added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of pain.
The elder man laughed.
"The only horrible thing in the world is _ennui_, Dorian.
That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness.
But we are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering about this thing at dinner.
I must tell them that the subject is to be tabooed.
As for omens, there is no such thing as an omen.
Destiny does not send us heralds.
She is too wise or too cruel for that.
Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian?
You have everything in the world that a man can want.
There is no one who would not be delighted to change places with you."  "There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry.
Don't laugh like that.
I am telling you the truth.
The wretched peasant who has just died is better off than I am.
I have no terror of death.
It is the coming of death that terrifies me.
Its monstrous wings seem to wheel in the leaden air around me.
Good heavens! don't you see a man moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?"  Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand was pointing.
"Yes," he said, smiling, "I see the gardener waiting for you.
I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the table to-night.
How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow!  You must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town."  Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching.
The man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master.
"Her Grace told me to wait for an answer," he murmured.
Dorian put the letter into his pocket.
"Tell her Grace that I am coming in," he said, coldly.
The man turned round and went rapidly in the direction of the house.
"How fond women are of doing dangerous things!" laughed Lord Henry.
"It is one of the qualities in them that I admire most.
A woman will flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on."  "How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry!  In the present instance, you are quite astray.
I like the duchess very much, but I don't love her."  "And the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you are excellently matched."  "You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for scandal."  "The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said Lord Henry, lighting a cigarette.
"You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram."  "The world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the answer.
"I wish I could love," cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in his voice.
"But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the desire.
I am too much concentrated on myself.
My own personality has become a burden to me.
I want to escape, to go away, to forget.
It was silly of me to come down here at all.
I think I shall send a wire to Harvey to have the yacht got ready.
On a yacht one is safe."  "Safe from what, Dorian?
You are in some trouble.
Why not tell me what it is?
You know I would help you."  "I can't tell you, Harry," he answered sadly.
"And I dare say it is only a fancy of mine.
This unfortunate accident has upset me.
I have a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me."  "What nonsense!"  "I hope it is, but I can't help feeling it.
Ah! here is the duchess, looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown.
You see we have come back, Duchess."  "I have heard all about it, Mr. Gray," she answered.
"Poor Geoffrey is terribly upset.
And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare.
How curious!"  "Yes, it was very curious.
I don't know what made me say it.
Some whim, I suppose.
It looked the loveliest of little live things.
But I am sorry they told you about the man.
It is a hideous subject."  "It is an annoying subject," broke in Lord Henry.
"It has no psychological value at all.
Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on purpose, how interesting he would be!  I should like to know some one who had committed a real murder."  "How horrid of you, Harry!" cried the duchess.
"Isn't it, Mr. Gray?
Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again.
He is going to faint."  Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled.
"It is nothing, Duchess," he murmured; "my nerves are dreadfully out of order.
That is all.
I am afraid I walked too far this morning.
I didn't hear what Harry said.
Was it very bad?
You must tell me some other time.
I think I must go and lie down.
You will excuse me, won't you?"  They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the conservatory on to the terrace.
As the glass door closed behind Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous eyes.
"Are you very much in love with him?" he asked.
She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape.
"I wish I knew," she said at last.
He shook his head.
"Knowledge would be fatal.
It is the uncertainty that charms one.
A mist makes things wonderful."  "One may lose one's way."  "All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys."  "What is that?"  "Disillusion."  "It was my _debut_ in life," she sighed.
"It came to you crowned."  "I am tired of strawberry leaves."  "They become you."  "Only in public."  "You would miss them," said Lord Henry.
"I will not part with a petal."  "Monmouth has ears."  "Old age is dull of hearing."  "Has he never been jealous?"  "I wish he had been."  He glanced about as if in search of something.
"What are you looking for?" she inquired.
"The button from your foil," he answered.
"You have dropped it."  She laughed.
"I have still the mask."  "It makes your eyes lovelier," was his reply.
She laughed again.
Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet fruit.
Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror in every tingling fibre of his body.
Life had suddenly become too hideous a burden for him to bear.
The dreadful death of the unlucky beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to pre-figure death for himself also.
He had nearly swooned at what Lord Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.
At five o'clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham at the door by eight-thirty.
He was determined not to sleep another night at Selby Royal.
It was an ill-omened place.
Death walked there in the sunlight.
The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.
Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up to town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in his absence.
As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see him.
He frowned and bit his lip.
"Send him in," he muttered, after some moments' hesitation.
As soon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a drawer and spread it out before him.
"I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this morning, Thornton?" he said, taking up a pen.
"Yes, sir," answered the gamekeeper.
"Was the poor fellow married?
Had he any people dependent on him?" asked Dorian, looking bored.
"If so, I should not like them to be left in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary."  "We don't know who he is, sir.
That is what I took the liberty of coming to you about."  "Don't know who he is?" said Dorian, listlessly.
"What do you mean?
Wasn't he one of your men?"  "No, sir.
Never saw him before.
Seems like a sailor, sir."  The pen dropped from Dorian Gray's hand, and he felt as if his heart had suddenly stopped beating.
"A sailor?" he cried out.
"Did you say a sailor?"  "Yes, sir.
He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on both arms, and that kind of thing."  "Was there anything found on him?" said Dorian, leaning forward and looking at the man with startled eyes.
"Anything that would tell his name?"  "Some money, sir--not much, and a six-shooter.
There was no name of any kind.
A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like.
A sort of sailor we think."  Dorian started to his feet.
A terrible hope fluttered past him.
He clutched at it madly.
"Where is the body?" he exclaimed.
"Quick!  I must see it at once."  "It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir.
The folk don't like to have that sort of thing in their houses.
They say a corpse brings bad luck."  "The Home Farm!  Go there at once and meet me.
Tell one of the grooms to bring my horse round.
No. Never mind.
I'll go to the stables myself.
It will save time."  In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the long avenue as hard as he could go.
The trees seemed to sweep past him in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his path.
Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him.
He lashed her across the neck with his crop.
She cleft the dusky air like an arrow.
The stones flew from her hoofs.
At last he reached the Home Farm.
Two men were loitering in the yard.
He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them.
In the farthest stable a light was glimmering.
Something seemed to tell him that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand upon the latch.
There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a discovery that would either make or mar his life.
Then he thrust the door open and entered.
On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers.
A spotted handkerchief had been placed over the face.
A coarse candle, stuck in a bottle, sputtered beside it.
Dorian Gray shuddered.
He felt that his could not be the hand to take the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to come to him.
"Take that thing off the face.
I wish to see it," he said, clutching at the door-post for support.
When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward.
A cry of joy broke from his lips.
The man who had been shot in the thicket was James Vane.
He stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body.
As he rode home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.
"There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good," cried Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled with rose-water.
"You are quite perfect.
Pray, don't change."  Dorian Gray shook his head.
"No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful things in my life.
I am not going to do any more.
I began my good actions yesterday."  "Where were you yesterday?"  "In the country, Harry.
I was staying at a little inn by myself."  "My dear boy," said Lord Henry, smiling, "anybody can be good in the country.
There are no temptations there.
That is the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized.
Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to.
There are only two ways by which man can reach it.
One is by being cultured, the other by being corrupt.
Country people have no opportunity of being either, so they stagnate."  "Culture and corruption," echoed Dorian.
"I have known something of both.
It seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found together.
For I have a new ideal, Harry.
I am going to alter.
I think I have altered."  "You have not yet told me what your good action was.
Or did you say you had done more than one?" asked his companion as he spilled into his plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.
"I can tell you, Harry.
It is not a story I could tell to any one else.
I spared somebody.
It sounds vain, but you understand what I mean.
She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane.
I think it was that which first attracted me to her.
You remember Sibyl, don't you?
How long ago that seems!  Well, Hetty was not one of our own class, of course.
She was simply a girl in a village.
But I really loved her.
I am quite sure that I loved her.
All during this wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her two or three times a week.
Yesterday she met me in a little orchard.
The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was laughing.
We were to have gone away together this morning at dawn.
Suddenly I determined to leave her as flowerlike as I had found her."  "I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill of real pleasure, Dorian," interrupted Lord Henry.
"But I can finish your idyll for you.
You gave her good advice and broke her heart.
That was the beginning of your reformation."  "Harry, you are horrible!  You mustn't say these dreadful things.
Hetty's heart is not broken.
Of course, she cried and all that.
But there is no disgrace upon her.
She can live, like Perdita, in her garden of mint and marigold."  "And weep over a faithless Florizel," said Lord Henry, laughing, as he leaned back in his chair.
"My dear Dorian, you have the most curiously boyish moods.
Do you think this girl will ever be really content now with any one of her own rank?
I suppose she will be married some day to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman.
Well, the fact of having met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she will be wretched.
From a moral point of view, I cannot say that I think much of your great renunciation.
Even as a beginning, it is poor.
Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn't floating at the present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?"  "I can't bear this, Harry!  You mock at everything, and then suggest the most serious tragedies.
I am sorry I told you now.
I don't care what you say to me.
I know I was right in acting as I did.
Poor Hetty!  As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at the window, like a spray of jasmine.
Don't let us talk about it any more, and don't try to persuade me that the first good action I have done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever known, is really a sort of sin.
I want to be better.
I am going to be better.
Tell me something about yourself.
What is going on in town?
I have not been to the club for days."  "The people are still discussing poor Basil's disappearance."  "I should have thought they had got tired of that by this time," said Dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.
"My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having more than one topic every three months.
They have been very fortunate lately, however.
They have had my own divorce-case and Alan Campbell's suicide.
Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist.
Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor Basil, and the French police declare that Basil never arrived in Paris at all.
I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has been seen in San Francisco.
It is an odd thing, but every one who disappears is said to be seen at San Francisco.
It must be a delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world."  "What do you think has happened to Basil?" asked Dorian, holding up his Burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could discuss the matter so calmly.
"I have not the slightest idea.
If Basil chooses to hide himself, it is no business of mine.
If he is dead, I don't want to think about him.
Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me.
I hate it."  "Why?" said the younger man wearily.
"Because," said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt trellis of an open vinaigrette box, "one can survive everything nowadays except that.
Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away.
Let us have our coffee in the music-room, Dorian.
You must play Chopin to me.
The man with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely.
Poor Victoria! I was very fond of her.
The house is rather lonely without her.
Of course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit.
But then one regrets the loss even of one's worst habits.
Perhaps one regrets them the most.
They are such an essential part of one's personality."  Dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next room, sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white and black ivory of the keys.
After the coffee had been brought in, he stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, "Harry, did it ever occur to you that Basil was murdered?"  Lord Henry yawned.
"Basil was very popular, and always wore a Waterbury watch.
Why should he have been murdered?
He was not clever enough to have enemies.
Of course, he had a wonderful genius for painting.
But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull as possible.
Basil was really rather dull.
He only interested me once, and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art."  "I was very fond of Basil," said Dorian with a note of sadness in his voice.
"But don't people say that he was murdered?"  "Oh, some of the papers do.
It does not seem to me to be at all probable.
I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not the sort of man to have gone to them.
He had no curiosity.
It was his chief defect."  "What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered Basil?" said the younger man.
He watched him intently after he had spoken.
"I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that doesn't suit you.
All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.
It is not in you, Dorian, to commit a murder.
I am sorry if I hurt your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true.
Crime belongs exclusively to the lower orders.
I don't blame them in the smallest degree.
I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us, simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations."  "A method of procuring sensations?
Do you think, then, that a man who has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again?
Don't tell me that."  "Oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often," cried Lord Henry, laughing.
"That is one of the most important secrets of life.
I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake.
One should never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner.
But let us pass from poor Basil.
I wish I could believe that he had come to such a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can't.
I dare say he fell into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the scandal.
Yes:  I should fancy that was his end.
I see him lying now on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair.
Do you know, I don't think he would have done much more good work.
During the last ten years his painting had gone off very much."  Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo perch.
As his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards and forwards.
"Yes," he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of his pocket; "his painting had quite gone off.
It seemed to me to have lost something.
It had lost an ideal.
When you and he ceased to be great friends, he ceased to be a great artist.
What was it separated you?
I suppose he bored you.
If so, he never forgave you.
It's a habit bores have.
By the way, what has become of that wonderful portrait he did of you?
I don't think I have ever seen it since he finished it.
Oh!  I remember your telling me years ago that you had sent it down to Selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the way.
You never got it back?
What a pity! it was really a masterpiece.
I remember I wanted to buy it.
I wish I had now.
It belonged to Basil's best period.
Since then, his work was that curious mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man to be called a representative British artist.
Did you advertise for it?
You should."  "I forget," said Dorian.
"I suppose I did.
But I never really liked it.
I am sorry I sat for it.
The memory of the thing is hateful to me.
Why do you talk of it?
It used to remind me of those curious lines in some play--Hamlet, I think--how do they run?--      "Like the painting of a sorrow,      A face without a heart."  Yes:  that is what it was like."  Lord Henry laughed.
"If a man treats life artistically, his brain is his heart," he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.
Dorian Gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano.
"'Like the painting of a sorrow,'" he repeated, "'a face without a heart.'"  The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes.
"By the way, Dorian," he said after a pause, "'what does it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose--how does the quotation run?--his own soul'?"  The music jarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his friend.
"Why do you ask me that, Harry?"  "My dear fellow," said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise, "I asked you because I thought you might be able to give me an answer.
That is all.
I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people listening to some vulgar street-preacher.
As I passed by, I heard the man yelling out that question to his audience.
It struck me as being rather dramatic.
London is very rich in curious effects of that kind.
A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips--it was really very good in its way, quite a suggestion.
I thought of telling the prophet that art had a soul, but that man had not.
I am afraid, however, he would not have understood me."  "Don't, Harry.
The soul is a terrible reality.
It can be bought, and sold, and bartered away.
It can be poisoned, or made perfect.
There is a soul in each one of us.
I know it."  "Do you feel quite sure of that, Dorian?"  "Quite sure."  "Ah! then it must be an illusion.
The things one feels absolutely certain about are never true.
That is the fatality of faith, and the lesson of romance.
How grave you are!  Don't be so serious.
What have you or I to do with the superstitions of our age?
No:  we have given up our belief in the soul.
Play me something.
Play me a nocturne, Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept your youth.
You must have some secret.
I am only ten years older than you are, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow.
You are really wonderful, Dorian.
You have never looked more charming than you do to-night.
You remind me of the day I saw you first.
You were rather cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary.
You have changed, of course, but not in appearance.
I wish you would tell me your secret.
To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early, or be respectable.
Youth!  There is nothing like it.
It's absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth.
The only people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much younger than myself.
They seem in front of me.
Life has revealed to them her latest wonder.
As for the aged, I always contradict the aged.
I do it on principle.
If you ask them their opinion on something that happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in 1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew absolutely nothing.
How lovely that thing you are playing is!  I wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weeping round the villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes?
It is marvellously romantic.
What a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that is not imitative!  Don't stop.
I want music to-night.
It seems to me that you are the young Apollo and that I am Marsyas listening to you.
I have sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of.
The tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young.
I am amazed sometimes at my own sincerity.
Ah, Dorian, how happy you are! What an exquisite life you have had!  You have drunk deeply of everything.
You have crushed the grapes against your palate.
Nothing has been hidden from you.
And it has all been to you no more than the sound of music.
It has not marred you.
You are still the same."  "I am not the same, Harry."  "Yes, you are the same.
I wonder what the rest of your life will be.
Don't spoil it by renunciations.
At present you are a perfect type.
Don't make yourself incomplete.
You are quite flawless now.
You need not shake your head:  you know you are.
Besides, Dorian, don't deceive yourself.
Life is not governed by will or intention.
Life is a question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which thought hides itself and passion has its dreams.
You may fancy yourself safe and think yourself strong.
But a chance tone of colour in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume that you had once loved and that brings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten poem that you had come across again, a cadence from a piece of music that you had ceased to play--I tell you, Dorian, that it is on things like these that our lives depend.
Browning writes about that somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us.
There are moments when the odour of _lilas blanc_ passes suddenly across me, and I have to live the strangest month of my life over again.
I wish I could change places with you, Dorian.
The world has cried out against us both, but it has always worshipped you.
It always will worship you.
You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found.
I am so glad that you have never done anything, never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything outside of yourself!  Life has been your art.
You have set yourself to music.
Your days are your sonnets."  Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair.
"Yes, life has been exquisite," he murmured, "but I am not going to have the same life, Harry.
And you must not say these extravagant things to me.
You don't know everything about me.
I think that if you did, even you would turn from me.
You laugh.
Don't laugh."  "Why have you stopped playing, Dorian?
Go back and give me the nocturne over again.
Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that hangs in the dusky air.
She is waiting for you to charm her, and if you play she will come closer to the earth.
You won't?
Let us go to the club, then.
It has been a charming evening, and we must end it charmingly.
There is some one at White's who wants immensely to know you--young Lord Poole, Bournemouth's eldest son.
He has already copied your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you.
He is quite delightful and rather reminds me of you."  "I hope not," said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes.
"But I am tired to-night, Harry.
I shan't go to the club.
It is nearly eleven, and I want to go to bed early."  "Do stay.
You have never played so well as to-night.
There was something in your touch that was wonderful.
It had more expression than I had ever heard from it before."  "It is because I am going to be good," he answered, smiling.
"I am a little changed already."  "You cannot change to me, Dorian," said Lord Henry.
"You and I will always be friends."  "Yet you poisoned me with a book once.
I should not forgive that.
Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one.
It does harm."  "My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize.
You will soon be going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people against all the sins of which you have grown tired.
You are much too delightful to do that.
Besides, it is no use.
You and I are what we are, and will be what we will be.
As for being poisoned by a book, there is no such thing as that.
Art has no influence upon action.
It annihilates the desire to act.
It is superbly sterile.
The books that the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame.
That is all.
But we won't discuss literature.
Come round to-morrow.
I am going to ride at eleven.
We might go together, and I will take you to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome.
She is a charming woman, and wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.
Mind you come.
Or shall we lunch with our little duchess?
She says she never sees you now.
Perhaps you are tired of Gladys?
I thought you would be.
Her clever tongue gets on one's nerves.
Well, in any case, be here at eleven."  "Must I really come, Harry?"  "Certainly.
The park is quite lovely now.
I don't think there have been such lilacs since the year I met you."  "Very well.
I shall be here at eleven," said Dorian.
"Good night, Harry."  As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he had something more to say.
Then he sighed and went out.
It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and did not even put his silk scarf round his throat.
As he strolled home, smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him.
He heard one of them whisper to the other, "That is Dorian Gray." He remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared at, or talked about.
He was tired of hearing his own name now.
Half the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was that no one knew who he was.
He had often told the girl whom he had lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him.
He had told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly.
What a laugh she had!--just like a thrush singing.
And how pretty she had been in her cotton dresses and her large hats!  She knew nothing, but she had everything that he had lost.
When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him.
He sent him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.
Was it really true that one could never change?
He felt a wild longing for the unstained purity of his boyhood--his rose-white boyhood, as Lord Henry had once called it.
He knew that he had tarnished himself, filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to shame.
But was it all irretrievable?
Was there no hope for him?
Ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the unsullied splendour of eternal youth!  All his failure had been due to that.
Better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure swift penalty along with it.
There was purification in punishment.
Not "Forgive us our sins" but "Smite us for our iniquities" should be the prayer of man to a most just God.
The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids laughed round it as of old.
He took it up, as he had done on that night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished shield.
Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: "The world is changed because you are made of ivory and gold.
The curves of your lips rewrite history."  The phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated them over and over to himself.
Then he loathed his own beauty, and flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters beneath his heel.
It was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty and the youth that he had prayed for.
But for those two things, his life might have been free from stain.
His beauty had been to him but a mask, his youth but a mockery.
What was youth at best?
A green, an unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts.
Why had he worn its livery?
Youth had spoiled him.
It was better not to think of the past.
Nothing could alter that.
It was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think.
James Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard.
Alan Campbell had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the secret that he had been forced to know.
The excitement, such as it was, over Basil Hallward's disappearance would soon pass away.
It was already waning.
He was perfectly safe there.
Nor, indeed, was it the death of Basil Hallward that weighed most upon his mind.
It was the living death of his own soul that troubled him.
Basil had painted the portrait that had marred his life.
He could not forgive him that.
It was the portrait that had done everything.
Basil had said things to him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience.
The murder had been simply the madness of a moment.
As for Alan Campbell, his suicide had been his own act.
He had chosen to do it.
It was nothing to him.
A new life!  That was what he wanted.
That was what he was waiting for.
Surely he had begun it already.
He had spared one innocent thing, at any rate.
He would never again tempt innocence.
He would be good.
As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in the locked room had changed.
Surely it was not still so horrible as it had been?
Perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel every sign of evil passion from the face.
Perhaps the signs of evil had already gone away.
He would go and look.
He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs.
As he unbarred the door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face and lingered for a moment about his lips.
Yes, he would be good, and the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror to him.
He felt as if the load had been lifted from him already.
He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and dragged the purple hanging from the portrait.
A cry of pain and indignation broke from him.
He could see no change, save that in the eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of the hypocrite.
The thing was still loathsome--more loathsome, if possible, than before--and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed brighter, and more like blood newly spilled.
Then he trembled.
Had it been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed?
Or the desire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry had hinted, with his mocking laugh?
Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things finer than we are ourselves?
Or, perhaps, all these?
And why was the red stain larger than it had been?
It seemed to have crept like a horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers.
There was blood on the painted feet, as though the thing had dripped--blood even on the hand that had not held the knife.
Confess?
Did it mean that he was to confess?
To give himself up and be put to death?
He laughed.
He felt that the idea was monstrous.
Besides, even if he did confess, who would believe him?
There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere.
Everything belonging to him had been destroyed.
He himself had burned what had been below-stairs.
The world would simply say that he was mad.
They would shut him up if he persisted in his story....
Yet it was his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public atonement.
There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to earth as well as to heaven.
Nothing that he could do would cleanse him till he had told his own sin.
His sin?
He shrugged his shoulders.
The death of Basil Hallward seemed very little to him.
He was thinking of Hetty Merton.
For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul that he was looking at.
Vanity?
Curiosity?
Hypocrisy?
Had there been nothing more in his renunciation than that?
There had been something more.
At least he thought so.
But who could tell?
...
No. There had been nothing more.
Through vanity he had spared her.
In hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness.
For curiosity's sake he had tried the denial of self.
He recognized that now.
But this murder--was it to dog him all his life?
Was he always to be burdened by his past?
Was he really to confess?
Never.
There was only one bit of evidence left against him.
The picture itself--that was evidence.
He would destroy it.
Why had he kept it so long?
Once it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old.
Of late he had felt no such pleasure.
It had kept him awake at night.
When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes should look upon it.
It had brought melancholy across his passions.
Its mere memory had marred many moments of joy.
It had been like conscience to him.
Yes, it had been conscience.
He would destroy it.
He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward.
He had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it.
It was bright, and glistened.
As it had killed the painter, so it would kill the painter's work, and all that that meant.
It would kill the past, and when that was dead, he would be free.
It would kill this monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at peace.
He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.
There was a cry heard, and a crash.
The cry was so horrible in its agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms.
Two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked up at the great house.
They walked on till they met a policeman and brought him back.
The man rang the bell several times, but there was no answer.
Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was all dark.
After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico and watched.
"Whose house is that, Constable?" asked the elder of the two gentlemen.
"Mr. Dorian Gray's, sir," answered the policeman.
They looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered.
One of them was Sir Henry Ashton's uncle.
Inside, in the servants' part of the house, the half-clad domestics were talking in low whispers to each other.
Old Mrs.
Leaf was crying and wringing her hands.
Francis was as pale as death.
After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the footmen and crept upstairs.
They knocked, but there was no reply.
They called out.
Everything was still.
Finally, after vainly trying to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the balcony.
The windows yielded easily--their bolts were old.
When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his exquisite youth and beauty.
Lying on the floor was a dead man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart.
He was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage.
It was not till they had examined the rings that they recognized who it was.﻿The artist is the creator of beautiful things.
To reveal art and  conceal the artist is art's aim.
The critic is he who can translate  into another manner or a new material his impression of beautiful  things.
The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography.
Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without  being charming.
This is a fault.
Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the  cultivated.
For these there is hope.
They are the elect to whom  beautiful things mean only beauty.
There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book.
Books are well  written, or badly written.
That is all.
The nineteenth century dislike of realism is the rage of Caliban seeing  his own face in a glass.
The nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban  not seeing his own face in a glass.
The moral life of man forms part  of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality of art consists  in the perfect use of an imperfect medium.
No artist desires to prove  anything.
Even things that are true can be proved.
No artist has  ethical sympathies.
An ethical sympathy in an artist is an  unpardonable mannerism of style.
No artist is ever morbid.
The artist  can express everything.
Thought and language are to the artist  instruments of an art.
Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for  an art.
From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is  the art of the musician.
From the point of view of feeling, the  actor's craft is the type.
All art is at once surface and symbol.
Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril.
Those who read  the symbol do so at their peril.
It is the spectator, and not life,  that art really mirrors.
Diversity of opinion about a work of art  shows that the work is new, complex, and vital.
When critics disagree,  the artist is in accord with himself.
We can forgive a man for making  a useful thing as long as he does not admire it.
The only excuse for  making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.
All art is quite useless.
The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light  summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through  the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate  perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.
From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was  lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry  Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured  blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to  bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then  the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long  tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window,  producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of  those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of  an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of  swiftness and motion.
The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their  way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous  insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine,  seemed to make the stillness more oppressive.
The dim roar of London  was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.
In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the  full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty,  and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist  himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago  caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many  strange conjectures.
As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so  skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his  face, and seemed about to linger there.
But he suddenly started up,  and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he  sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he  feared he might awake.
"It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done," said  Lord Henry languidly.
"You must certainly send it next year to the  Grosvenor.
The Academy is too large and too vulgar.
Whenever I have  gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been  able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that  I have not been able to see the people, which was worse.
The Grosvenor  is really the only place."    "I don't think I shall send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head  back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at  Oxford.
"No, I won't send it anywhere."    Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through  the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls  from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette.
"Not send it anywhere?
My  dear fellow, why?
Have you any reason?
What odd chaps you painters  are!  You do anything in the world to gain a reputation.
As soon as  you have one, you seem to want to throw it away.
It is silly of you,  for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about,  and that is not being talked about.
A portrait like this would set you  far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite  jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion."    "I know you will laugh at me," he replied, "but I really can't exhibit  it.
I have put too much of myself into it."    Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.
"Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same."    "Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you  were so vain; and I really can't see any resemblance between you, with  your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young  Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves.
Why,  my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you--well, of course you have an  intellectual expression and all that.
But beauty, real beauty, ends  where an intellectual expression begins.
Intellect is in itself a mode  of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.
The moment one  sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something  horrid.
Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.
How perfectly hideous they are!  Except, of course, in the Church.
But  then in the Church they don't think.
A bishop keeps on saying at the  age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen,  and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful.
Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but  whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks.
I feel quite sure of  that.
He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always  here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in  summer when we want something to chill our intelligence.
Don't flatter  yourself, Basil:  you are not in the least like him."    "You don't understand me, Harry," answered the artist.
"Of course I am  not like him.
I know that perfectly well.
Indeed, I should be sorry  to look like him.
You shrug your shoulders?
I am telling you the  truth.
There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual  distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the  faltering steps of kings.
It is better not to be different from one's  fellows.
The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world.
They can sit at their ease and gape at the play.
If they know nothing  of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat.
They  live as we all should live--undisturbed, indifferent, and without  disquiet.
They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it  from alien hands.
Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they  are--my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray's good looks--we  shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly."    "Dorian Gray?
Is that his name?" asked Lord Henry, walking across the  studio towards Basil Hallward.
"Yes, that is his name.
I didn't intend to tell it to you."    "But why not?"    "Oh, I can't explain.
When I like people immensely, I never tell their  names to any one.
It is like surrendering a part of them.
I have  grown to love secrecy.
It seems to be the one thing that can make  modern life mysterious or marvellous to us.
The commonest thing is  delightful if one only hides it.
When I leave town now I never tell my  people where I am going.
If I did, I would lose all my pleasure.
It  is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great  deal of romance into one's life.
I suppose you think me awfully  foolish about it?"    "Not at all," answered Lord Henry, "not at all, my dear Basil.
You  seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that  it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties.
I  never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing.
When we meet--we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go  down to the Duke's--we tell each other the most absurd stories with the  most serious faces.
My wife is very good at it--much better, in fact,  than I am.
She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do.
But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all.
I sometimes  wish she would; but she merely laughs at me."    "I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry," said Basil  Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden.
"I  believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are  thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues.
You are an extraordinary  fellow.
You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing.
Your cynicism is simply a pose."    "Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,"  cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the  garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that  stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush.
The sunlight slipped over  the polished leaves.
In the grass, white daisies were tremulous.
After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch.
"I am afraid I must be  going, Basil," he murmured, "and before I go, I insist on your  answering a question I put to you some time ago."    "What is that?" said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.
"You know quite well."    "I do not, Harry."    "Well, I will tell you what it is.
I want you to explain to me why you  won't exhibit Dorian Gray's picture.
I want the real reason."    "I told you the real reason."    "No, you did not.
You said it was because there was too much of  yourself in it.
Now, that is childish."    "Harry," said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every  portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not  of the sitter.
The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion.
It is  not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on  the coloured canvas, reveals himself.
The reason I will not exhibit  this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of  my own soul."    Lord Henry laughed.
"And what is that?" he asked.
"I will tell you," said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity came  over his face.
"I am all expectation, Basil," continued his companion, glancing at him.
"Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry," answered the painter;  "and I am afraid you will hardly understand it.
Perhaps you will  hardly believe it."    Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from  the grass and examined it.
"I am quite sure I shall understand it," he  replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk,  "and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it  is quite incredible."    The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy  lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the  languid air.
A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a  blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze  wings.
Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward's heart  beating, and wondered what was coming.
"The story is simply this," said the painter after some time.
"Two  months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon's.
You know we poor  artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to  remind the public that we are not savages.
With an evening coat and a  white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain  a reputation for being civilized.
Well, after I had been in the room  about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious  academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at  me.
I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.
When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale.
A curious sensation  of terror came over me.
I knew that I had come face to face with some  one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to  do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art  itself.
I did not want any external influence in my life.
You know  yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature.
I have always been my  own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray.
Then--but I don't know how to explain it to you.
Something seemed to  tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life.
I had  a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and  exquisite sorrows.
I grew afraid and turned to quit the room.
It was  not conscience that made me do so:  it was a sort of cowardice.
I take  no credit to myself for trying to escape."    "Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil.
Conscience is the trade-name of the firm.
That is all."    "I don't believe that, Harry, and I don't believe you do either.
However, whatever was my motive--and it may have been pride, for I used  to be very proud--I certainly struggled to the door.
There, of course,  I stumbled against Lady Brandon.
'You are not going to run away so  soon, Mr. Hallward?' she screamed out.
You know her curiously shrill  voice?"    "Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said Lord Henry,  pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.
"I could not get rid of her.
She brought me up to royalties, and  people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras  and parrot noses.
She spoke of me as her dearest friend.
I had only  met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.
I  believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at  least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the  nineteenth-century standard of immortality.
Suddenly I found myself  face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely  stirred me.
We were quite close, almost touching.
Our eyes met again.
It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.
Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all.
It was simply inevitable.
We would have spoken to each other without any introduction.
I am sure  of that.
Dorian told me so afterwards.
He, too, felt that we were  destined to know each other."    "And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?" asked his  companion.
"I know she goes in for giving a rapid _precis_ of all her  guests.
I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old  gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my  ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to  everybody in the room, the most astounding details.
I simply fled.
I  like to find out people for myself.
But Lady Brandon treats her guests  exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.
She either explains them  entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants  to know."    "Poor Lady Brandon!  You are hard on her, Harry!" said Hallward  listlessly.
"My dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only succeeded in  opening a restaurant.
How could I admire her?
But tell me, what did  she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?"    "Oh, something like, 'Charming boy--poor dear mother and I absolutely  inseparable.
Quite forget what he does--afraid he--doesn't do  anything--oh, yes, plays the piano--or is it the violin, dear Mr.  Gray?'  Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at  once."    "Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far  the best ending for one," said the young lord, plucking another daisy.
Hallward shook his head.
"You don't understand what friendship is,  Harry," he murmured--"or what enmity is, for that matter.
You like  every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one."    "How horribly unjust of you!" cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back  and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of  glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the  summer sky.
"Yes; horribly unjust of you.
I make a great difference  between people.
I choose my friends for their good looks, my  acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good  intellects.
A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies.
I have not got one who is a fool.
They are all men of some  intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me.
Is that  very vain of me?
I think it is rather vain."    "I should think it was, Harry.
But according to your category I must  be merely an acquaintance."    "My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance."    "And much less than a friend.
A sort of brother, I suppose?"    "Oh, brothers!  I don't care for brothers.
My elder brother won't die,  and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else."    "Harry!" exclaimed Hallward, frowning.
"My dear fellow, I am not quite serious.
But I can't help detesting my  relations.
I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand  other people having the same faults as ourselves.
I quite sympathize  with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices  of the upper orders.
The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and  immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of  us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves.
When  poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite  magnificent.
And yet I don't suppose that ten per cent of the  proletariat live correctly."    "I don't agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is  more, Harry, I feel sure you don't either."    Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his  patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane.
"How English you are  Basil!  That is the second time you have made that observation.
If one  puts forward an idea to a true Englishman--always a rash thing to  do--he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong.
The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes  it oneself.
Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do  with the sincerity of the man who expresses it.
Indeed, the  probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely  intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured  by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices.
However, I don't  propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you.
I  like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no  principles better than anything else in the world.
Tell me more about  Mr. Dorian Gray.
How often do you see him?"    "Every day.
I couldn't be happy if I didn't see him every day.
He is  absolutely necessary to me."    "How extraordinary!  I thought you would never care for anything but  your art."    "He is all my art to me now," said the painter gravely.
"I sometimes  think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the  world's history.
The first is the appearance of a new medium for art,  and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also.
What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of  Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will  some day be to me.
It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from  him, sketch from him.
Of course, I have done all that.
But he is much  more to me than a model or a sitter.
I won't tell you that I am  dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such  that art cannot express it.
There is nothing that art cannot express,  and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good  work, is the best work of my life.
But in some curious way--I wonder  will you understand me?--his personality has suggested to me an  entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style.
I see  things differently, I think of them differently.
I can now recreate  life in a way that was hidden from me before.
'A dream of form in days  of thought'--who is it who says that?
I forget; but it is what Dorian  Gray has been to me.
The merely visible presence of this lad--for he  seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over  twenty--his merely visible presence--ah!  I wonder can you realize all  that that means?
Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh  school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic  spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek.
The harmony of  soul and body--how much that is!  We in our madness have separated the  two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is  void.
Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me!  You remember  that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price  but which I would not part with?
It is one of the best things I have  ever done.
And why is it so?
Because, while I was painting it, Dorian  Gray sat beside me.
Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and  for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I  had always looked for and always missed."    "Basil, this is extraordinary!  I must see Dorian Gray."    Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden.
After  some time he came back.
"Harry," he said, "Dorian Gray is to me simply  a motive in art.
You might see nothing in him.
I see everything in  him.
He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is  there.
He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner.
I find  him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of  certain colours.
That is all."    "Then why won't you exhibit his portrait?" asked Lord Henry.
"Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of  all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never  cared to speak to him.
He knows nothing about it.
He shall never know  anything about it.
But the world might guess it, and I will not bare  my soul to their shallow prying eyes.
My heart shall never be put  under their microscope.
There is too much of myself in the thing,  Harry--too much of myself!"    "Poets are not so scrupulous as you are.
They know how useful passion  is for publication.
Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions."    "I hate them for it," cried Hallward.
"An artist should create  beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them.
We  live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of  autobiography.
We have lost the abstract sense of beauty.
Some day I  will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall  never see my portrait of Dorian Gray."    "I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won't argue with you.
It is only  the intellectually lost who ever argue.
Tell me, is Dorian Gray very  fond of you?"    The painter considered for a few moments.
"He likes me," he answered  after a pause; "I know he likes me.
Of course I flatter him  dreadfully.
I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I  know I shall be sorry for having said.
As a rule, he is charming to  me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things.
Now and  then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real  delight in giving me pain.
Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away  my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put  in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a  summer's day."    "Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger," murmured Lord Henry.
"Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will.
It is a sad thing to think  of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty.
That  accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate  ourselves.
In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have  something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and  facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place.
The thoroughly  well-informed man--that is the modern ideal.
And the mind of the  thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing.
It is like a  _bric-a-brac_ shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above  its proper value.
I think you will tire first, all the same.
Some day  you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little  out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of colour, or something.
You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think  that he has behaved very badly to you.
The next time he calls, you  will be perfectly cold and indifferent.
It will be a great pity, for  it will alter you.
What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance  of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind  is that it leaves one so unromantic."    "Harry, don't talk like that.
As long as I live, the personality of  Dorian Gray will dominate me.
You can't feel what I feel.
You change  too often."    "Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it.
Those who are  faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who  know love's tragedies."  And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty  silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and  satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase.
There was  a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy,  and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like  swallows.
How pleasant it was in the garden!  And how delightful other  people's emotions were!--much more delightful than their ideas, it  seemed to him.
One's own soul, and the passions of one's  friends--those were the fascinating things in life.
He pictured to  himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed  by staying so long with Basil Hallward.
Had he gone to his aunt's, he  would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole  conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the  necessity for model lodging-houses.
Each class would have preached the  importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity  in their own lives.
The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift,  and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour.
It was  charming to have escaped all that!  As he thought of his aunt, an idea  seemed to strike him.
He turned to Hallward and said, "My dear fellow,  I have just remembered."    "Remembered what, Harry?"    "Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray."    "Where was it?" asked Hallward, with a slight frown.
"Don't look so angry, Basil.
It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha's.
She  told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help  her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray.
I am bound to  state that she never told me he was good-looking.
Women have no  appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not.
She said  that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature.
I at once  pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly  freckled, and tramping about on huge feet.
I wish I had known it was  your friend."    "I am very glad you didn't, Harry."    "Why?"    "I don't want you to meet him."    "You don't want me to meet him?"    "No."    "Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, coming into  the garden.
"You must introduce me now," cried Lord Henry, laughing.
The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight.
"Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker:  I shall be in in a few moments." The  man bowed and went up the walk.
Then he looked at Lord Henry.
"Dorian Gray is my dearest friend," he  said.
"He has a simple and a beautiful nature.
Your aunt was quite  right in what she said of him.
Don't spoil him.
Don't try to  influence him.
Your influence would be bad.
The world is wide, and  has many marvellous people in it.
Don't take away from me the one  person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses:  my life as an  artist depends on him.
Mind, Harry, I trust you."  He spoke very  slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.
"What nonsense you talk!" said Lord Henry, smiling, and taking Hallward  by the arm, he almost led him into the house.
As they entered they saw Dorian Gray.
He was seated at the piano, with  his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann's  "Forest Scenes."  "You must lend me these, Basil," he cried.
"I want  to learn them.
They are perfectly charming."    "That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian."    "Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don't want a life-sized portrait of  myself," answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a  wilful, petulant manner.
When he caught sight of Lord Henry, a faint  blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up.
"I beg your  pardon, Basil, but I didn't know you had any one with you."    "This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine.
I  have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you  have spoiled everything."    "You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray," said Lord  Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand.
"My aunt has often  spoken to me about you.
You are one of her favourites, and, I am  afraid, one of her victims also."    "I am in Lady Agatha's black books at present," answered Dorian with a  funny look of penitence.
"I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel  with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it.
We were to  have played a duet together--three duets, I believe.
I don't know what  she will say to me.
I am far too frightened to call."    "Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt.
She is quite devoted to you.
And I don't think it really matters about your not being there.
The  audience probably thought it was a duet.
When Aunt Agatha sits down to  the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people."    "That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me," answered Dorian,  laughing.
Lord Henry looked at him.
Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome,  with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp  gold hair.
There was something in his face that made one trust him at  once.
All the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth's  passionate purity.
One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from  the world.
No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.
"You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. Gray--far too  charming." And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened  his cigarette-case.
The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes  ready.
He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry's last  remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said,  "Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day.
Would you think it  awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?"    Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray.
"Am I to go, Mr. Gray?"  he asked.
"Oh, please don't, Lord Henry.
I see that Basil is in one of his sulky  moods, and I can't bear him when he sulks.
Besides, I want you to tell  me why I should not go in for philanthropy."    "I don't know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray.
It is so tedious a  subject that one would have to talk seriously about it.
But I  certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop.
You  don't really mind, Basil, do you?
You have often told me that you  liked your sitters to have some one to chat to."    Hallward bit his lip.
"If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay.
Dorian's whims are laws to everybody, except himself."    Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves.
"You are very pressing, Basil,  but I am afraid I must go.
I have promised to meet a man at the  Orleans.
Good-bye, Mr. Gray.
Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon  Street.
I am nearly always at home at five o'clock.
Write to me when  you are coming.
I should be sorry to miss you."    "Basil," cried Dorian Gray, "if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go,  too.
You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is  horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant.
Ask  him to stay.
I insist upon it."    "Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me," said Hallward,  gazing intently at his picture.
"It is quite true, I never talk when I  am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious  for my unfortunate sitters.
I beg you to stay."    "But what about my man at the Orleans?"    The painter laughed.
"I don't think there will be any difficulty about  that.
Sit down again, Harry.
And now, Dorian, get up on the platform,  and don't move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry  says.
He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the  single exception of myself."    Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek  martyr, and made a little _moue_ of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he  had rather taken a fancy.
He was so unlike Basil.
They made a  delightful contrast.
And he had such a beautiful voice.
After a few  moments he said to him, "Have you really a very bad influence, Lord  Henry?
As bad as Basil says?"    "There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray.
All influence  is immoral--immoral from the scientific point of view."    "Why?"    "Because to influence a person is to give him one's own soul.
He does  not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions.
His  virtues are not real to him.
His sins, if there are such things as  sins, are borrowed.
He becomes an echo of some one else's music, an  actor of a part that has not been written for him.
The aim of life is  self-development.
To realize one's nature perfectly--that is what each  of us is here for.
People are afraid of themselves, nowadays.
They  have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to  one's self.
Of course, they are charitable.
They feed the hungry and  clothe the beggar.
But their own souls starve, and are naked.
Courage  has gone out of our race.
Perhaps we never really had it.
The terror  of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is  the secret of religion--these are the two things that govern us.
And  yet--"    "Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good  boy," said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look  had come into the lad's face that he had never seen there before.
"And yet," continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with  that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of  him, and that he had even in his Eton days, "I believe that if one man  were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to  every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream--I  believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we  would forget all the maladies of mediaevalism, and return to the  Hellenic ideal--to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it  may be.
But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself.
The  mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial  that mars our lives.
We are punished for our refusals.
Every impulse  that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us.
The body  sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of  purification.
Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure,  or the luxury of a regret.
The only way to get rid of a temptation is  to yield to it.
Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for  the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its  monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful.
It has been said that  the great events of the world take place in the brain.
It is in the  brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place  also.
You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your  rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid,  thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping  dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame--"    "Stop!" faltered Dorian Gray, "stop! you bewilder me.
I don't know  what to say.
There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it.
Don't  speak.
Let me think.
Or, rather, let me try not to think."    For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and  eyes strangely bright.
He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh  influences were at work within him.
Yet they seemed to him to have  come really from himself.
The few words that Basil's friend had said  to him--words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in  them--had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before,  but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.
Music had stirred him like that.
Music had troubled him many times.
But music was not articulate.
It was not a new world, but rather  another chaos, that it created in us.
Words!  Mere words!  How  terrible they were!  How clear, and vivid, and cruel!  One could not  escape from them.
And yet what a subtle magic there was in them!  They  seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to  have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute.
Mere  words!  Was there anything so real as words?
Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood.
He understood them now.
Life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him.
It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire.
Why had he not  known it?
With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him.
He knew the precise  psychological moment when to say nothing.
He felt intensely  interested.
He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had  produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen,  a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he  wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience.
He had merely shot an arrow into the air.
Had it hit the mark?
How  fascinating the lad was!    Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had  the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes  only from strength.
He was unconscious of the silence.
"Basil, I am tired of standing," cried Dorian Gray suddenly.
"I must  go out and sit in the garden.
The air is stifling here."    "My dear fellow, I am so sorry.
When I am painting, I can't think of  anything else.
But you never sat better.
You were perfectly still.
And I have caught the effect I wanted--the half-parted lips and the  bright look in the eyes.
I don't know what Harry has been saying to  you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression.
I suppose he has been paying you compliments.
You mustn't believe a  word that he says."    "He has certainly not been paying me compliments.
Perhaps that is the  reason that I don't believe anything he has told me."    "You know you believe it all," said Lord Henry, looking at him with his  dreamy languorous eyes.
"I will go out to the garden with you.
It is  horribly hot in the studio.
Basil, let us have something iced to  drink, something with strawberries in it."    "Certainly, Harry.
Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will  tell him what you want.
I have got to work up this background, so I  will join you later on.
Don't keep Dorian too long.
I have never been  in better form for painting than I am to-day.
This is going to be my  masterpiece.
It is my masterpiece as it stands."    Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his  face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their  perfume as if it had been wine.
He came close to him and put his hand  upon his shoulder.
"You are quite right to do that," he murmured.
"Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the  senses but the soul."    The lad started and drew back.
He was bareheaded, and the leaves had  tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads.
There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are  suddenly awakened.
His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some  hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.
"Yes," continued Lord Henry, "that is one of the great secrets of  life--to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means  of the soul.
You are a wonderful creation.
You know more than you  think you know, just as you know less than you want to know."    Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away.
He could not help liking  the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him.
His romantic,  olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him.
There was  something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating.
His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm.
They  moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their  own.
But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid.
Why had  it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself?
He had known  Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never  altered him.
Suddenly there had come some one across his life who  seemed to have disclosed to him life's mystery.
And, yet, what was  there to be afraid of?
He was not a schoolboy or a girl.
It was  absurd to be frightened.
"Let us go and sit in the shade," said Lord Henry.
"Parker has brought  out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be  quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again.
You really must  not allow yourself to become sunburnt.
It would be unbecoming."    "What can it matter?" cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on  the seat at the end of the garden.
"It should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray."    "Why?"    "Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing  worth having."    "I don't feel that, Lord Henry."    "No, you don't feel it now.
Some day, when you are old and wrinkled  and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and  passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you  will feel it terribly.
Now, wherever you go, you charm the world.
Will it always be so?
...
You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr.  Gray.
Don't frown.
You have.
And beauty is a form of genius--is  higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation.
It is of the  great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the  reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon.
It  cannot be questioned.
It has its divine right of sovereignty.
It  makes princes of those who have it.
You smile?
Ah! when you have lost  it you won't smile....
People say sometimes that beauty is only  superficial.
That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as  thought is.
To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders.
It is only  shallow people who do not judge by appearances.
The true mystery of  the world is the visible, not the invisible....
Yes, Mr. Gray, the  gods have been good to you.
But what the gods give they quickly take  away.
You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly,  and fully.
When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then  you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or  have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of  your past will make more bitter than defeats.
Every month as it wanes  brings you nearer to something dreadful.
Time is jealous of you, and  wars against your lilies and your roses.
You will become sallow, and  hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed.
You will suffer horribly....
Ah!  realize your youth while you have it.
Don't squander the gold of your  days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure,  or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar.
These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age.
Live!  Live  the wonderful life that is in you!  Let nothing be lost upon you.
Be  always searching for new sensations.
Be afraid of nothing....
A new  Hedonism--that is what our century wants.
You might be its visible  symbol.
With your personality there is nothing you could not do.
The  world belongs to you for a season....
The moment I met you I saw that  you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really  might be.
There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must  tell you something about yourself.
I thought how tragic it would be if  you were wasted.
For there is such a little time that your youth will  last--such a little time.
The common hill-flowers wither, but they  blossom again.
The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now.
In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after  year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars.
But we  never get back our youth.
The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty  becomes sluggish.
Our limbs fail, our senses rot.
We degenerate into  hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were  too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the  courage to yield to.
Youth!  Youth!  There is absolutely nothing in  the world but youth!"    Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering.
The spray of lilac fell  from his hand upon the gravel.
A furry bee came and buzzed round it  for a moment.
Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated  globe of the tiny blossoms.
He watched it with that strange interest  in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import  make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we  cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays  sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield.
After a time the  bee flew away.
He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian  convolvulus.
The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to  and fro.
Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made  staccato signs for them to come in.
They turned to each other and  smiled.
"I am waiting," he cried.
"Do come in.
The light is quite perfect,  and you can bring your drinks."    They rose up and sauntered down the walk together.
Two green-and-white  butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of  the garden a thrush began to sing.
"You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray," said Lord Henry, looking at  him.
"Yes, I am glad now.
I wonder shall I always be glad?"    "Always!  That is a dreadful word.
It makes me shudder when I hear it.
Women are so fond of using it.
They spoil every romance by trying to  make it last for ever.
It is a meaningless word, too.
The only  difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice  lasts a little longer."    As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord Henry's  arm.
"In that case, let our friendship be a caprice," he murmured,  flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and  resumed his pose.
Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him.
The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that  broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back  to look at his work from a distance.
In the slanting beams that  streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden.
The  heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.
After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for  a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the picture,  biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning.
"It is quite  finished," he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in  long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.
Lord Henry came over and examined the picture.
It was certainly a  wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.
"My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly," he said.
"It is the  finest portrait of modern times.
Mr. Gray, come over and look at  yourself."    The lad started, as if awakened from some dream.
"Is it really finished?" he murmured, stepping down from the platform.
"Quite finished," said the painter.
"And you have sat splendidly  to-day.
I am awfully obliged to you."    "That is entirely due to me," broke in Lord Henry.
"Isn't it, Mr.  Gray?"    Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture  and turned towards it.
When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks  flushed for a moment with pleasure.
A look of joy came into his eyes,  as if he had recognized himself for the first time.
He stood there  motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to  him, but not catching the meaning of his words.
The sense of his own  beauty came on him like a revelation.
He had never felt it before.
Basil Hallward's compliments had seemed to him to be merely the  charming exaggeration of friendship.
He had listened to them, laughed  at them, forgotten them.
They had not influenced his nature.
Then had  come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his  terrible warning of its brevity.
That had stirred him at the time, and  now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full  reality of the description flashed across him.
Yes, there would be a  day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and  colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed.
The scarlet  would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair.
The  life that was to make his soul would mar his body.
He would become  dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.
As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a  knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver.
His eyes  deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears.
He felt  as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.
"Don't you like it?" cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the  lad's silence, not understanding what it meant.
"Of course he likes it," said Lord Henry.
"Who wouldn't like it?
It  is one of the greatest things in modern art.
I will give you anything  you like to ask for it.
I must have it."    "It is not my property, Harry."    "Whose property is it?"    "Dorian's, of course," answered the painter.
"He is a very lucky fellow."    "How sad it is!" murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon  his own portrait.
"How sad it is!  I shall grow old, and horrible, and  dreadful.
But this picture will remain always young.
It will never be  older than this particular day of June....
If it were only the other  way!  If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was  to grow old!  For that--for that--I would give everything!  Yes, there  is nothing in the whole world I would not give!  I would give my soul  for that!"    "You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil," cried Lord  Henry, laughing.
"It would be rather hard lines on your work."    "I should object very strongly, Harry," said Hallward.
Dorian Gray turned and looked at him.
"I believe you would, Basil.
You like your art better than your friends.
I am no more to you than a  green bronze figure.
Hardly as much, I dare say."    The painter stared in amazement.
It was so unlike Dorian to speak like  that.
What had happened?
He seemed quite angry.
His face was flushed  and his cheeks burning.
"Yes," he continued, "I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your  silver Faun.
You will like them always.
How long will you like me?
Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose.
I know, now, that when one  loses one's good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything.
Your picture has taught me that.
Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right.
Youth is the only thing worth having.
When I find that I am growing  old, I shall kill myself."    Hallward turned pale and caught his hand.
"Dorian!  Dorian!" he cried,  "don't talk like that.
I have never had such a friend as you, and I  shall never have such another.
You are not jealous of material things,  are you?--you who are finer than any of them!"    "I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die.
I am jealous of  the portrait you have painted of me.
Why should it keep what I must  lose?
Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives  something to it.
Oh, if it were only the other way!  If the picture  could change, and I could be always what I am now!  Why did you paint  it?
It will mock me some day--mock me horribly!"  The hot tears welled  into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the  divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.
"This is your doing, Harry," said the painter bitterly.
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"It is the real Dorian Gray--that  is all."    "It is not."    "If it is not, what have I to do with it?"    "You should have gone away when I asked you," he muttered.
"I stayed when you asked me," was Lord Henry's answer.
"Harry, I can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between  you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever  done, and I will destroy it.
What is it but canvas and colour?
I will  not let it come across our three lives and mar them."    Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid  face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal  painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window.
What  was he doing there?
His fingers were straying about among the litter  of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something.
Yes, it was for  the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel.
He had  found it at last.
He was going to rip up the canvas.
With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to  Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of  the studio.
"Don't, Basil, don't!" he cried.
"It would be murder!"    "I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian," said the painter  coldly when he had recovered from his surprise.
"I never thought you  would."    "Appreciate it?
I am in love with it, Basil.
It is part of myself.
I  feel that."    "Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and  sent home.
Then you can do what you like with yourself." And he walked  across the room and rang the bell for tea.
"You will have tea, of  course, Dorian?
And so will you, Harry?
Or do you object to such  simple pleasures?"    "I adore simple pleasures," said Lord Henry.
"They are the last refuge  of the complex.
But I don't like scenes, except on the stage.
What  absurd fellows you are, both of you!  I wonder who it was defined man  as a rational animal.
It was the most premature definition ever given.
Man is many things, but he is not rational.
I am glad he is not, after  all--though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture.
You  had much better let me have it, Basil.
This silly boy doesn't really  want it, and I really do."    "If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you!"  cried Dorian Gray; "and I don't allow people to call me a silly boy."    "You know the picture is yours, Dorian.
I gave it to you before it  existed."    "And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you  don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."    "I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry."    "Ah! this morning!  You have lived since then."    There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden  tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table.
There was a  rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn.
Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page.
Dorian Gray  went over and poured out the tea.
The two men sauntered languidly to  the table and examined what was under the covers.
"Let us go to the theatre to-night," said Lord Henry.
"There is sure  to be something on, somewhere.
I have promised to dine at White's, but  it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I  am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a  subsequent engagement.
I think that would be a rather nice excuse:  it  would have all the surprise of candour."    "It is such a bore putting on one's dress-clothes," muttered Hallward.
"And, when one has them on, they are so horrid."    "Yes," answered Lord Henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth  century is detestable.
It is so sombre, so depressing.
Sin is the  only real colour-element left in modern life."    "You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry."    "Before which Dorian?
The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the  one in the picture?"    "Before either."    "I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry," said the  lad.
"Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won't you?"    "I can't, really.
I would sooner not.
I have a lot of work to do."    "Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray."    "I should like that awfully."    The painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture.
"I shall stay with the real Dorian," he said, sadly.
"Is it the real Dorian?" cried the original of the portrait, strolling  across to him.
"Am I really like that?"    "Yes; you are just like that."    "How wonderful, Basil!"    "At least you are like it in appearance.
But it will never alter,"  sighed Hallward.
"That is something."    "What a fuss people make about fidelity!" exclaimed Lord Henry.
"Why,  even in love it is purely a question for physiology.
It has nothing to  do with our own will.
Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old  men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say."    "Don't go to the theatre to-night, Dorian," said Hallward.
"Stop and  dine with me."    "I can't, Basil."    "Why?"    "Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him."    "He won't like you the better for keeping your promises.
He always  breaks his own.
I beg you not to go."    Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.
"I entreat you."    The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them  from the tea-table with an amused smile.
"I must go, Basil," he answered.
"Very well," said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on  the tray.
"It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had  better lose no time.
Good-bye, Harry.
Good-bye, Dorian.
Come and see  me soon.
Come to-morrow."    "Certainly."    "You won't forget?"    "No, of course not," cried Dorian.
"And ...
Harry!"    "Yes, Basil?"    "Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning."    "I have forgotten it."    "I trust you."    "I wish I could trust myself," said Lord Henry, laughing.
"Come, Mr.  Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place.
Good-bye, Basil.
It has been a most interesting afternoon."    As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a  sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.
At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon  Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial  if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called  selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was  considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him.
His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young  and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a  capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at  Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by  reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches,  and his inordinate passion for pleasure.
The son, who had been his  father's secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat  foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months  later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great  aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing.
He had two large town  houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and  took most of his meals at his club.
He paid some attention to the  management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself  for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of  having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of  burning wood on his own hearth.
In politics he was a Tory, except when  the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them  for being a pack of Radicals.
He was a hero to his valet, who bullied  him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.
Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the  country was going to the dogs.
His principles were out of date, but  there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.
When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough  shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over _The Times_.
"Well,  Harry," said the old gentleman, "what brings you out so early?
I  thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till  five."    "Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George.
I want to get  something out of you."    "Money, I suppose," said Lord Fermor, making a wry face.
"Well, sit  down and tell me all about it.
Young people, nowadays, imagine that  money is everything."    "Yes," murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; "and  when they grow older they know it.
But I don't want money.
It is only  people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay  mine.
Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly  upon it.
Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor's tradesmen, and  consequently they never bother me.
What I want is information:  not  useful information, of course; useless information."    "Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry,  although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense.
When I was in  the Diplomatic, things were much better.
But I hear they let them in  now by examination.
What can you expect?
Examinations, sir, are pure  humbug from beginning to end.
If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite  enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him."    "Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George," said  Lord Henry languidly.
"Mr. Dorian Gray?
Who is he?" asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushy  white eyebrows.
"That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George.
Or rather, I know  who he is.
He is the last Lord Kelso's grandson.
His mother was a  Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux.
I want you to tell me about his  mother.
What was she like?
Whom did she marry?
You have known nearly  everybody in your time, so you might have known her.
I am very much  interested in Mr. Gray at present.
I have only just met him."    "Kelso's grandson!" echoed the old gentleman.
"Kelso's grandson! ...
Of course....
I knew his mother intimately.
I believe I was at her  christening.
She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret  Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless  young fellow--a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or  something of that kind.
Certainly.
I remember the whole thing as if  it happened yesterday.
The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few  months after the marriage.
There was an ugly story about it.
They  said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult  his son-in-law in public--paid him, sir, to do it, paid him--and that  the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon.
The thing was  hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some  time afterwards.
He brought his daughter back with him, I was told,  and she never spoke to him again.
Oh, yes; it was a bad business.
The  girl died, too, died within a year.
So she left a son, did she?
I had  forgotten that.
What sort of boy is he?
If he is like his mother, he  must be a good-looking chap."    "He is very good-looking," assented Lord Henry.
"I hope he will fall into proper hands," continued the old man.
"He  should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing  by him.
His mother had money, too.
All the Selby property came to  her, through her grandfather.
Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him  a mean dog.
He was, too.
Came to Madrid once when I was there.
Egad,  I was ashamed of him.
The Queen used to ask me about the English noble  who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares.
They  made quite a story of it.
I didn't dare show my face at Court for a  month.
I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies."    "I don't know," answered Lord Henry.
"I fancy that the boy will be  well off.
He is not of age yet.
He has Selby, I know.
He told me so.
And ...
his mother was very beautiful?"    "Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw,  Harry.
What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could  understand.
She could have married anybody she chose.
Carlington was  mad after her.
She was romantic, though.
All the women of that family  were.
The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful.
Carlington went on his knees to her.
Told me so himself.
She laughed  at him, and there wasn't a girl in London at the time who wasn't after  him.
And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is  this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an  American?
Ain't English girls good enough for him?"    "It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George."    "I'll back English women against the world, Harry," said Lord Fermor,  striking the table with his fist.
"The betting is on the Americans."    "They don't last, I am told," muttered his uncle.
"A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a  steeplechase.
They take things flying.
I don't think Dartmoor has a  chance."    "Who are her people?" grumbled the old gentleman.
"Has she got any?"    Lord Henry shook his head.
"American girls are as clever at concealing  their parents, as English women are at concealing their past," he said,  rising to go.
"They are pork-packers, I suppose?"    "I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor's sake.
I am told that  pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after  politics."    "Is she pretty?"    "She behaves as if she was beautiful.
Most American women do.
It is  the secret of their charm."    "Why can't these American women stay in their own country?
They are  always telling us that it is the paradise for women."    "It is.
That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively  anxious to get out of it," said Lord Henry.
"Good-bye, Uncle George.
I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer.
Thanks for giving me  the information I wanted.
I always like to know everything about my  new friends, and nothing about my old ones."    "Where are you lunching, Harry?"    "At Aunt Agatha's.
I have asked myself and Mr. Gray.
He is her latest  _protege_."    "Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with  her charity appeals.
I am sick of them.
Why, the good woman thinks  that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads."    "All right, Uncle George, I'll tell her, but it won't have any effect.
Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity.
It is their  distinguishing characteristic."    The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his  servant.
Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street  and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.
So that was the story of Dorian Gray's parentage.
Crudely as it had  been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a  strange, almost modern romance.
A beautiful woman risking everything  for a mad passion.
A few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a  hideous, treacherous crime.
Months of voiceless agony, and then a  child born in pain.
The mother snatched away by death, the boy left to  solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man.
Yes; it was an  interesting background.
It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it  were.
Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something  tragic.
Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might  blow....
And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as  with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat  opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer  rose the wakening wonder of his face.
Talking to him was like playing  upon an exquisite violin.
He answered to every touch and thrill of the  bow....
There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of  influence.
No other activity was like it.
To project one's soul into  some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one's  own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of  passion and youth; to convey one's temperament into another as though  it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in  that--perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited  and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and  grossly common in its aims....
He was a marvellous type, too, this lad,  whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil's studio, or could be  fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate.
Grace was his, and the  white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old Greek marbles kept for  us.
There was nothing that one could not do with him.
He could be  made a Titan or a toy.
What a pity it was that such beauty was  destined to fade! ...
And Basil?
From a psychological point of view,  how interesting he was!  The new manner in art, the fresh mode of  looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence  of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in  dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing  herself, Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for  her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are  wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things  becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value,  as though they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect  form whose shadow they made real:  how strange it all was!  He  remembered something like it in history.
Was it not Plato, that artist  in thought, who had first analyzed it?
Was it not Buonarotti who had  carved it in the coloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence?
But in our own  century it was strange....
Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray  what, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned  the wonderful portrait.
He would seek to dominate him--had already,  indeed, half done so.
He would make that wonderful spirit his own.
There was something fascinating in this son of love and death.
Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses.
He found that he had  passed his aunt's some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back.
When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they  had gone in to lunch.
He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and  passed into the dining-room.
"Late as usual, Harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.
He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to  her, looked round to see who was there.
Dorian bowed to him shyly from  the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek.
Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and  good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample  architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are  described by contemporary historians as stoutness.
Next to her sat, on  her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who  followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the  best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in  accordance with a wise and well-known rule.
The post on her left was  occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable  charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence,  having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he  had to say before he was thirty.
His own neighbour was Mrs.
Vandeleur,  one of his aunt's oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so  dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.
Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most  intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement  in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely  earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once  himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of  them ever quite escape.
"We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry," cried the duchess,  nodding pleasantly to him across the table.
"Do you think he will  really marry this fascinating young person?"    "I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess."    "How dreadful!" exclaimed Lady Agatha.
"Really, some one should  interfere."    "I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American  dry-goods store," said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.
"My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas."    "Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?" asked the duchess, raising  her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.
"American novels," answered Lord Henry, helping himself to some quail.
The duchess looked puzzled.
"Don't mind him, my dear," whispered Lady Agatha.
"He never means  anything that he says."    "When America was discovered," said the Radical member--and he began to  give some wearisome facts.
Like all people who try to exhaust a  subject, he exhausted his listeners.
The duchess sighed and exercised  her privilege of interruption.
"I wish to goodness it never had been  discovered at all!" she exclaimed.
"Really, our girls have no chance  nowadays.
It is most unfair."    "Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered," said Mr.  Erskine; "I myself would say that it had merely been detected."    "Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered the  duchess vaguely.
"I must confess that most of them are extremely  pretty.
And they dress well, too.
They get all their dresses in  Paris.
I wish I could afford to do the same."    "They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris," chuckled Sir  Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour's cast-off clothes.
"Really!  And where do bad Americans go to when they die?" inquired the  duchess.
"They go to America," murmured Lord Henry.
Sir Thomas frowned.
"I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced  against that great country," he said to Lady Agatha.
"I have travelled  all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters,  are extremely civil.
I assure you that it is an education to visit it."    "But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?" asked Mr.  Erskine plaintively.
"I don't feel up to the journey."    Sir Thomas waved his hand.
"Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on  his shelves.
We practical men like to see things, not to read about  them.
The Americans are an extremely interesting people.
They are  absolutely reasonable.
I think that is their distinguishing  characteristic.
Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people.
I  assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans."    "How dreadful!" cried Lord Henry.
"I can stand brute force, but brute  reason is quite unbearable.
There is something unfair about its use.
It is hitting below the intellect."    "I do not understand you," said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.
"I do, Lord Henry," murmured Mr. Erskine, with a smile.
"Paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.
"Was that a paradox?" asked Mr. Erskine.
"I did not think so.
Perhaps  it was.
Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth.
To test  reality we must see it on the tight rope.
When the verities become  acrobats, we can judge them."    "Dear me!" said Lady Agatha, "how you men argue!  I am sure I never can  make out what you are talking about.
Oh!  Harry, I am quite vexed with  you.
Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up  the East End?
I assure you he would be quite invaluable.
They would  love his playing."    "I want him to play to me," cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked  down the table and caught a bright answering glance.
"But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel," continued Lady Agatha.
"I can sympathize with everything except suffering," said Lord Henry,  shrugging his shoulders.
"I cannot sympathize with that.
It is too  ugly, too horrible, too distressing.
There is something terribly  morbid in the modern sympathy with pain.
One should sympathize with  the colour, the beauty, the joy of life.
The less said about life's  sores, the better."    "Still, the East End is a very important problem," remarked Sir Thomas  with a grave shake of the head.
"Quite so," answered the young lord.
"It is the problem of slavery,  and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves."    The politician looked at him keenly.
"What change do you propose,  then?" he asked.
Lord Henry laughed.
"I don't desire to change anything in England  except the weather," he answered.
"I am quite content with philosophic  contemplation.
But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt  through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should  appeal to science to put us straight.
The advantage of the emotions is  that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is  not emotional."    "But we have such grave responsibilities," ventured Mrs.
Vandeleur  timidly.
"Terribly grave," echoed Lady Agatha.
Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine.
"Humanity takes itself too  seriously.
It is the world's original sin.
If the caveman had known  how to laugh, history would have been different."    "You are really very comforting," warbled the duchess.
"I have always  felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no  interest at all in the East End.
For the future I shall be able to  look her in the face without a blush."    "A blush is very becoming, Duchess," remarked Lord Henry.
"Only when one is young," she answered.
"When an old woman like myself  blushes, it is a very bad sign.
Ah!  Lord Henry, I wish you would tell  me how to become young again."    He thought for a moment.
"Can you remember any great error that you  committed in your early days, Duchess?" he asked, looking at her across  the table.
"A great many, I fear," she cried.
"Then commit them over again," he said gravely.
"To get back one's  youth, one has merely to repeat one's follies."    "A delightful theory!" she exclaimed.
"I must put it into practice."    "A dangerous theory!" came from Sir Thomas's tight lips.
Lady Agatha  shook her head, but could not help being amused.
Mr. Erskine listened.
"Yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life.
Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and  discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are  one's mistakes."    A laugh ran round the table.
He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and  transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent  with fancy and winged it with paradox.
The praise of folly, as he went  on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and  catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her  wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the  hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober.
Facts fled  before her like frightened forest things.
Her white feet trod the huge  press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round  her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over  the vat's black, dripping, sloping sides.
It was an extraordinary  improvisation.
He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him,  and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose  temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and  to lend colour to his imagination.
He was brilliant, fantastic,  irresponsible.
He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they  followed his pipe, laughing.
Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him,  but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips  and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.
At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room  in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was  waiting.
She wrung her hands in mock despair.
"How annoying!" she  cried.
"I must go.
I have to call for my husband at the club, to take  him to some absurd meeting at Willis's Rooms, where he is going to be  in the chair.
If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn't  have a scene in this bonnet.
It is far too fragile.
A harsh word  would ruin it.
No, I must go, dear Agatha.
Good-bye, Lord Henry, you  are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing.
I am sure I don't  know what to say about your views.
You must come and dine with us some  night.
Tuesday?
Are you disengaged Tuesday?"    "For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess," said Lord Henry with a  bow.
"Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you  come"; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the  other ladies.
When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. Erskine moved round, and taking  a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.
"You talk books away," he said; "why don't you write one?"    "I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine.
I  should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely  as a Persian carpet and as unreal.
But there is no literary public in  England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias.
Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the  beauty of literature."    "I fear you are right," answered Mr. Erskine.
"I myself used to have  literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago.
And now, my dear  young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you  really meant all that you said to us at lunch?"    "I quite forget what I said," smiled Lord Henry.
"Was it all very bad?"    "Very bad indeed.
In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if  anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being  primarily responsible.
But I should like to talk to you about life.
The generation into which I was born was tedious.
Some day, when you  are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your  philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate  enough to possess."    "I shall be charmed.
A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege.
It has a perfect host, and a perfect library."    "You will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous  bow.
"And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt.
I am due at  the Athenaeum.
It is the hour when we sleep there."    "All of you, Mr. Erskine?"    "Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs.
We are practising for an English  Academy of Letters."    Lord Henry laughed and rose.
"I am going to the park," he cried.
As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm.
"Let me come with you," he murmured.
"But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,"  answered Lord Henry.
"I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you.
Do  let me.
And you will promise to talk to me all the time?
No one talks  so wonderfully as you do."    "Ah!  I have talked quite enough for to-day," said Lord Henry, smiling.
"All I want now is to look at life.
You may come and look at it with  me, if you care to."    One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious  arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry's house in Mayfair.
It  was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled  wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling  of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk,  long-fringed Persian rugs.
On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette  by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for  Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies  that Queen had selected for her device.
Some large blue china jars and  parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small  leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a  summer day in London.
Lord Henry had not yet come in.
He was always late on principle, his  principle being that punctuality is the thief of time.
So the lad was  looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages  of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had  found in one of the book-cases.
The formal monotonous ticking of the  Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him.
Once or twice he thought of going  away.
At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened.
"How late you  are, Harry!" he murmured.
"I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray," answered a shrill voice.
He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet.
"I beg your pardon.
I  thought--"    "You thought it was my husband.
It is only his wife.
You must let me  introduce myself.
I know you quite well by your photographs.
I think  my husband has got seventeen of them."    "Not seventeen, Lady Henry?"    "Well, eighteen, then.
And I saw you with him the other night at the  opera."  She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her  vague forget-me-not eyes.
She was a curious woman, whose dresses  always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a  tempest.
She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion  was never returned, she had kept all her illusions.
She tried to look  picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy.
Her name was  Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.
"That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?"    "Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin.
I like Wagner's music better than  anybody's.
It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other  people hearing what one says.
That is a great advantage, don't you  think so, Mr. Gray?"    The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her  fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.
Dorian smiled and shook his head:  "I am afraid I don't think so, Lady  Henry.
I never talk during music--at least, during good music.
If one  hears bad music, it is one's duty to drown it in conversation."    "Ah! that is one of Harry's views, isn't it, Mr. Gray?
I always hear  Harry's views from his friends.
It is the only way I get to know of  them.
But you must not think I don't like good music.
I adore it, but  I am afraid of it.
It makes me too romantic.
I have simply worshipped  pianists--two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me.
I don't know what  it is about them.
Perhaps it is that they are foreigners.
They all  are, ain't they?
Even those that are born in England become foreigners  after a time, don't they?
It is so clever of them, and such a  compliment to art.
Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn't it?
You have  never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray?
You must come.
I  can't afford orchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners.
They make  one's rooms look so picturesque.
But here is Harry!  Harry, I came in  to look for you, to ask you something--I forget what it was--and I  found Mr. Gray here.
We have had such a pleasant chat about music.
We  have quite the same ideas.
No; I think our ideas are quite different.
But he has been most pleasant.
I am so glad I've seen him."    "I am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said Lord Henry, elevating his  dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused  smile.
"So sorry I am late, Dorian.
I went to look after a piece of  old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it.
Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing."    "I am afraid I must be going," exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an  awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh.
"I have promised to drive  with the duchess.
Good-bye, Mr. Gray.
Good-bye, Harry.
You are  dining out, I suppose?
So am I.
Perhaps I shall see you at Lady  Thornbury's."    "I dare say, my dear," said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her  as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the  rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of  frangipanni.
Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the  sofa.
"Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian," he said after a  few puffs.
"Why, Harry?"    "Because they are so sentimental."    "But I like sentimental people."    "Never marry at all, Dorian.
Men marry because they are tired; women,  because they are curious:  both are disappointed."    "I don't think I am likely to marry, Harry.
I am too much in love.
That is one of your aphorisms.
I am putting it into practice, as I do  everything that you say."    "Who are you in love with?" asked Lord Henry after a pause.
"With an actress," said Dorian Gray, blushing.
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"That is a rather commonplace  _debut_."    "You would not say so if you saw her, Harry."    "Who is she?"    "Her name is Sibyl Vane."    "Never heard of her."    "No one has.
People will some day, however.
She is a genius."    "My dear boy, no woman is a genius.
Women are a decorative sex.
They  never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.
Women  represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the  triumph of mind over morals."    "Harry, how can you?"    "My dear Dorian, it is quite true.
I am analysing women at present, so  I ought to know.
The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was.
I find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain  and the coloured.
The plain women are very useful.
If you want to  gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down  to supper.
The other women are very charming.
They commit one  mistake, however.
They paint in order to try and look young.
Our  grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly.
_Rouge_ and  _esprit_ used to go together.
That is all over now.
As long as a woman  can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly  satisfied.
As for conversation, there are only five women in London  worth talking to, and two of these can't be admitted into decent  society.
However, tell me about your genius.
How long have you known  her?"    "Ah!  Harry, your views terrify me."    "Never mind that.
How long have you known her?"    "About three weeks."    "And where did you come across her?"    "I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.
After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you.
You  filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life.
For days  after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins.
As I lounged  in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one  who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they  led.
Some of them fascinated me.
Others filled me with terror.
There  was an exquisite poison in the air.
I had a passion for sensations....
Well, one evening about seven o'clock, I determined to go out in search  of some adventure.
I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours,  with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins,  as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me.
I fancied  a thousand things.
The mere danger gave me a sense of delight.
I  remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we  first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret  of life.
I don't know what I expected, but I went out and wandered  eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black  grassless squares.
About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little  theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills.
A hideous  Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was  standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar.
He had greasy  ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled  shirt.
'Have a box, my Lord?' he said, when he saw me, and he took off  his hat with an air of gorgeous servility.
There was something about  him, Harry, that amused me.
He was such a monster.
You will laugh at  me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the  stage-box.
To the present day I can't make out why I did so; and yet if  I hadn't--my dear Harry, if I hadn't--I should have missed the greatest  romance of my life.
I see you are laughing.
It is horrid of you!"    "I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you.
But you  should not say the greatest romance of your life.
You should say the  first romance of your life.
You will always be loved, and you will  always be in love with love.
A _grande passion_ is the privilege of  people who have nothing to do.
That is the one use of the idle classes  of a country.
Don't be afraid.
There are exquisite things in store  for you.
This is merely the beginning."    "Do you think my nature so shallow?" cried Dorian Gray angrily.
"No; I think your nature so deep."    "How do you mean?"    "My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really  the shallow people.
What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity,  I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination.
Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life  of the intellect--simply a confession of failure.
Faithfulness!  I  must analyse it some day.
The passion for property is in it.
There  are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that  others might pick them up.
But I don't want to interrupt you.
Go on  with your story."    "Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a  vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face.
I looked out from behind the  curtain and surveyed the house.
It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and  cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake.
The gallery and pit were  fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and  there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the  dress-circle.
Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there  was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."    "It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama."    "Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing.
I began to wonder  what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill.
What  do you think the play was, Harry?"    "I should think 'The Idiot Boy', or 'Dumb but Innocent'.
Our fathers  used to like that sort of piece, I believe.
The longer I live, Dorian,  the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is  not good enough for us.
In art, as in politics, _les grandperes ont  toujours tort_."    "This play was good enough for us, Harry.
It was Romeo and Juliet.
I  must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare  done in such a wretched hole of a place.
Still, I felt interested, in  a sort of way.
At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act.
There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat  at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the  drop-scene was drawn up and the play began.
Romeo was a stout elderly  gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure  like a beer-barrel.
Mercutio was almost as bad.
He was played by the  low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most  friendly terms with the pit.
They were both as grotesque as the  scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth.
But  Juliet!  Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a  little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of  dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were  like the petals of a rose.
She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen  in my life.
You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that  beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears.
I tell you,  Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came  across me.
And her voice--I never heard such a voice.
It was very low  at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one's  ear.
Then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a  distant hautboy.
In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy  that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing.
There  were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins.
You  know how a voice can stir one.
Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane  are two things that I shall never forget.
When I close my eyes, I hear  them, and each of them says something different.
I don't know which to  follow.
Why should I not love her?
Harry, I do love her.
She is  everything to me in life.
Night after night I go to see her play.
One  evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen.
I have  seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from  her lover's lips.
I have watched her wandering through the forest of  Arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap.
She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and  given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of.
She has been  innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike  throat.
I have seen her in every age and in every costume.
Ordinary  women never appeal to one's imagination.
They are limited to their  century.
No glamour ever transfigures them.
One knows their minds as  easily as one knows their bonnets.
One can always find them.
There is  no mystery in any of them.
They ride in the park in the morning and  chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon.
They have their stereotyped  smile and their fashionable manner.
They are quite obvious.
But an  actress!  How different an actress is!  Harry! why didn't you tell me  that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"    "Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian."    "Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces."    "Don't run down dyed hair and painted faces.
There is an extraordinary  charm in them, sometimes," said Lord Henry.
"I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane."    "You could not have helped telling me, Dorian.
All through your life  you will tell me everything you do."    "Yes, Harry, I believe that is true.
I cannot help telling you things.
You have a curious influence over me.
If I ever did a crime, I would  come and confess it to you.
You would understand me."    "People like you--the wilful sunbeams of life--don't commit crimes,  Dorian.
But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same.
And  now tell me--reach me the matches, like a good boy--thanks--what are  your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?"    Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"Harry!  Sibyl Vane is sacred!"    "It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian," said  Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.
"But why  should you be annoyed?
I suppose she will belong to you some day.
When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one's self, and one  always ends by deceiving others.
That is what the world calls a  romance.
You know her, at any rate, I suppose?"    "Of course I know her.
On the first night I was at the theatre, the  horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and  offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her.
I was  furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds  of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona.
I  think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the  impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something."    "I am not surprised."    "Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers.
I told him I  never even read them.
He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and  confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy  against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought."    "I should not wonder if he was quite right there.
But, on the other  hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all  expensive."    "Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," laughed Dorian.
"By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre,  and I had to go.
He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly  recommended.
I declined.
The next night, of course, I arrived at the  place again.
When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that  I was a munificent patron of art.
He was a most offensive brute,  though he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare.
He told me  once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely  due to 'The Bard,' as he insisted on calling him.
He seemed to think  it a distinction."    "It was a distinction, my dear Dorian--a great distinction.
Most  people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose  of life.
To have ruined one's self over poetry is an honour.
But when  did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?"    "The third night.
She had been playing Rosalind.
I could not help  going round.
I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at  me--at least I fancied that she had.
The old Jew was persistent.
He  seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented.
It was curious my  not wanting to know her, wasn't it?"    "No; I don't think so."    "My dear Harry, why?"    "I will tell you some other time.
Now I want to know about the girl."    "Sibyl?
Oh, she was so shy and so gentle.
There is something of a  child about her.
Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told  her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious  of her power.
I think we were both rather nervous.
The old Jew stood  grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate  speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like  children.
He would insist on calling me 'My Lord,' so I had to assure  Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind.
She said quite simply to  me, 'You look more like a prince.
I must call you Prince Charming.'"    "Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments."    "You don't understand her, Harry.
She regarded me merely as a person  in a play.
She knows nothing of life.
She lives with her mother, a  faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta  dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen  better days."    "I know that look.
It depresses me," murmured Lord Henry, examining  his rings.
"The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest  me."    "You were quite right.
There is always something infinitely mean about  other people's tragedies."    "Sibyl is the only thing I care about.
What is it to me where she came  from?
From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and  entirely divine.
Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every  night she is more marvellous."    "That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now.
I  thought you must have some curious romance on hand.
You have; but it  is not quite what I expected."    "My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have  been to the opera with you several times," said Dorian, opening his  blue eyes in wonder.
"You always come dreadfully late."    "Well, I can't help going to see Sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is  only for a single act.
I get hungry for her presence; and when I think  of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I  am filled with awe."    "You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can't you?"    He shook his head.
"To-night she is Imogen," he answered, "and  to-morrow night she will be Juliet."    "When is she Sibyl Vane?"    "Never."    "I congratulate you."    "How horrid you are!  She is all the great heroines of the world in  one.
She is more than an individual.
You laugh, but I tell you she  has genius.
I love her, and I must make her love me.
You, who know  all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me!  I  want to make Romeo jealous.
I want the dead lovers of the world to  hear our laughter and grow sad.
I want a breath of our passion to stir  their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain.
My God,  Harry, how I worship her!"  He was walking up and down the room as he  spoke.
Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks.
He was terribly  excited.
Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure.
How different  he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward's  studio!  His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of  scarlet flame.
Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and  desire had come to meet it on the way.
"And what do you propose to do?" said Lord Henry at last.
"I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act.
I  have not the slightest fear of the result.
You are certain to  acknowledge her genius.
Then we must get her out of the Jew's hands.
She is bound to him for three years--at least for two years and eight  months--from the present time.
I shall have to pay him something, of  course.
When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and  bring her out properly.
She will make the world as mad as she has made  me."    "That would be impossible, my dear boy."    "Yes, she will.
She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in  her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it  is personalities, not principles, that move the age."    "Well, what night shall we go?"    "Let me see.
To-day is Tuesday.
Let us fix to-morrow.
She plays  Juliet to-morrow."    "All right.
The Bristol at eight o'clock; and I will get Basil."    "Not eight, Harry, please.
Half-past six.
We must be there before the  curtain rises.
You must see her in the first act, where she meets  Romeo."    "Half-past six!  What an hour!  It will be like having a meat-tea, or  reading an English novel.
It must be seven.
No gentleman dines before  seven.
Shall you see Basil between this and then?
Or shall I write to  him?"    "Dear Basil!  I have not laid eyes on him for a week.
It is rather  horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful  frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous  of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit  that I delight in it.
Perhaps you had better write to him.
I don't  want to see him alone.
He says things that annoy me.
He gives me good  advice."    Lord Henry smiled.
"People are very fond of giving away what they need  most themselves.
It is what I call the depth of generosity."    "Oh, Basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit  of a Philistine.
Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered  that."    "Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his  work.
The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his  prejudices, his principles, and his common sense.
The only artists I  have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.
Good  artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly  uninteresting in what they are.
A great poet, a really great poet, is  the most unpoetical of all creatures.
But inferior poets are  absolutely fascinating.
The worse their rhymes are, the more  picturesque they look.
The mere fact of having published a book of  second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible.
He lives the  poetry that he cannot write.
The others write the poetry that they  dare not realize."    "I wonder is that really so, Harry?" said Dorian Gray, putting some  perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that  stood on the table.
"It must be, if you say it.
And now I am off.
Imogen is waiting for me.
Don't forget about to-morrow.
Good-bye."    As he left the room, Lord Henry's heavy eyelids drooped, and he began  to think.
Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as  Dorian Gray, and yet the lad's mad adoration of some one else caused  him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy.
He was pleased by  it.
It made him a more interesting study.
He had been always  enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary  subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no  import.
And so he had begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by  vivisecting others.
Human life--that appeared to him the one thing  worth investigating.
Compared to it there was nothing else of any  value.
It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of  pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one's face a mask of glass,  nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the  imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams.
There  were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken  of them.
There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through  them if one sought to understand their nature.
And, yet, what a great  reward one received!  How wonderful the whole world became to one!  To  note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life  of the intellect--to observe where they met, and where they separated,  at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at  discord--there was a delight in that!  What matter what the cost was?
One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.
He was conscious--and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his  brown agate eyes--that it was through certain words of his, musical  words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray's soul had turned  to this white girl and bowed in worship before her.
To a large extent  the lad was his own creation.
He had made him premature.
That was  something.
Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its  secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were  revealed before the veil was drawn away.
Sometimes this was the effect  of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately  with the passions and the intellect.
But now and then a complex  personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed,  in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces,  just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.
Yes, the lad was premature.
He was gathering his harvest while it was  yet spring.
The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was  becoming self-conscious.
It was delightful to watch him.
With his  beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at.
It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end.
He was like  one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem  to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense of beauty,  and whose wounds are like red roses.
Soul and body, body and soul--how mysterious they were!  There was  animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.
The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade.
Who could  say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began?
How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists!  And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various  schools!  Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin?
Or was the  body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought?
The separation of  spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter  was a mystery also.
He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a  science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us.
As it  was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others.
Experience was of no ethical value.
It was merely the name men gave to  their mistakes.
Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of  warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation  of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow  and showed us what to avoid.
But there was no motive power in  experience.
It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself.
All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same  as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we  would do many times, and with joy.
It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by  which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and  certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to  promise rich and fruitful results.
His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane  was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest.
There was no  doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire  for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex  passion.
What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of  boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination,  changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from  sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous.
It was the  passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most  strongly over us.
Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we  were conscious.
It often happened that when we thought we were  experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.
While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the  door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for  dinner.
He got up and looked out into the street.
The sunset had  smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite.
The panes glowed like plates of heated metal.
The sky above was like a  faded rose.
He thought of his friend's young fiery-coloured life and  wondered how it was all going to end.
When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o'clock, he saw a telegram  lying on the hall table.
He opened it and found it was from Dorian  Gray.
It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl  Vane.
"Mother, Mother, I am so happy!" whispered the girl, burying her face  in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to  the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their  dingy sitting-room contained.
"I am so happy!" she repeated, "and you  must be happy, too!"    Mrs.
Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her  daughter's head.
"Happy!" she echoed, "I am only happy, Sibyl, when I  see you act.
You must not think of anything but your acting.
Mr.  Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money."    The girl looked up and pouted.
"Money, Mother?" she cried, "what does  money matter?
Love is more than money."    "Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to  get a proper outfit for James.
You must not forget that, Sibyl.
Fifty  pounds is a very large sum.
Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate."    "He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me,"  said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.
"I don't know how we could manage without him," answered the elder  woman querulously.
Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed.
"We don't want him any more,  Mother.
Prince Charming rules life for us now." Then she paused.
A  rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks.
Quick breath parted  the petals of her lips.
They trembled.
Some southern wind of passion  swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress.
"I love  him," she said simply.
"Foolish child! foolish child!" was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.
The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the  words.
The girl laughed again.
The joy of a caged bird was in her voice.
Her  eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a  moment, as though to hide their secret.
When they opened, the mist of  a dream had passed across them.
Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at  prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name  of common sense.
She did not listen.
She was free in her prison of  passion.
Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her.
She had called on  memory to remake him.
She had sent her soul to search for him, and it  had brought him back.
His kiss burned again upon her mouth.
Her  eyelids were warm with his breath.
Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery.
This  young man might be rich.
If so, marriage should be thought of.
Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning.
The  arrows of craft shot by her.
She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.
Suddenly she felt the need to speak.
The wordy silence troubled her.
"Mother, Mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much?
I know why  I love him.
I love him because he is like what love himself should be.
But what does he see in me?
I am not worthy of him.
And yet--why, I  cannot tell--though I feel so much beneath him, I don't feel humble.
I  feel proud, terribly proud.
Mother, did you love my father as I love  Prince Charming?"    The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her  cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain.
Sybil rushed  to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her.
"Forgive me,  Mother.
I know it pains you to talk about our father.
But it only  pains you because you loved him so much.
Don't look so sad.
I am as  happy to-day as you were twenty years ago.
Ah! let me be happy for  ever!"    "My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love.
Besides,  what do you know of this young man?
You don't even know his name.
The  whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away  to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you  should have shown more consideration.
However, as I said before, if he  is rich ..."    "Ah!  Mother, Mother, let me be happy!"    Mrs.
Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical  gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a  stage-player, clasped her in her arms.
At this moment, the door opened  and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room.
He was  thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat  clumsy in movement.
He was not so finely bred as his sister.
One  would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between  them.
Mrs.
Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile.
She  mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience.
She felt sure  that the _tableau_ was interesting.
"You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think," said the  lad with a good-natured grumble.
"Ah! but you don't like being kissed, Jim," she cried.
"You are a  dreadful old bear."  And she ran across the room and hugged him.
James Vane looked into his sister's face with tenderness.
"I want you  to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl.
I don't suppose I shall ever  see this horrid London again.
I am sure I don't want to."    "My son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured Mrs.
Vane, taking up  a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it.
She  felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group.
It would  have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.
"Why not, Mother?
I mean it."    "You pain me, my son.
I trust you will return from Australia in a  position of affluence.
I believe there is no society of any kind in  the Colonies--nothing that I would call society--so when you have made  your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London."    "Society!" muttered the lad.
"I don't want to know anything about  that.
I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the  stage.
I hate it."    "Oh, Jim!" said Sibyl, laughing, "how unkind of you!  But are you  really going for a walk with me?
That will be nice!  I was afraid you  were going to say good-bye to some of your friends--to Tom Hardy, who  gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for  smoking it.
It is very sweet of you to let me have your last  afternoon.
Where shall we go?
Let us go to the park."    "I am too shabby," he answered, frowning.
"Only swell people go to the  park."    "Nonsense, Jim," she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.
He hesitated for a moment.
"Very well," he said at last, "but don't be  too long dressing."  She danced out of the door.
One could hear her  singing as she ran upstairs.
Her little feet pattered overhead.
He walked up and down the room two or three times.
Then he turned to  the still figure in the chair.
"Mother, are my things ready?" he asked.
"Quite ready, James," she answered, keeping her eyes on her work.
For  some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this  rough stern son of hers.
Her shallow secret nature was troubled when  their eyes met.
She used to wonder if he suspected anything.
The  silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her.
She began to complain.
Women defend themselves by attacking, just as  they attack by sudden and strange surrenders.
"I hope you will be  contented, James, with your sea-faring life," she said.
"You must  remember that it is your own choice.
You might have entered a  solicitor's office.
Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in  the country often dine with the best families."    "I hate offices, and I hate clerks," he replied.
"But you are quite  right.
I have chosen my own life.
All I say is, watch over Sibyl.
Don't let her come to any harm.
Mother, you must watch over her."    "James, you really talk very strangely.
Of course I watch over Sibyl."    "I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to  talk to her.
Is that right?
What about that?"    "You are speaking about things you don't understand, James.
In the  profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying  attention.
I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time.
That  was when acting was really understood.
As for Sibyl, I do not know at  present whether her attachment is serious or not.
But there is no  doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman.
He is  always most polite to me.
Besides, he has the appearance of being  rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely."    "You don't know his name, though," said the lad harshly.
"No," answered his mother with a placid expression in her face.
"He  has not yet revealed his real name.
I think it is quite romantic of  him.
He is probably a member of the aristocracy."    James Vane bit his lip.
"Watch over Sibyl, Mother," he cried, "watch  over her."    "My son, you distress me very much.
Sibyl is always under my special  care.
Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why  she should not contract an alliance with him.
I trust he is one of the  aristocracy.
He has all the appearance of it, I must say.
It might be  a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl.
They would make a charming  couple.
His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices  them."    The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane  with his coarse fingers.
He had just turned round to say something  when the door opened and Sibyl ran in.
"How serious you both are!" she cried.
"What is the matter?"    "Nothing," he answered.
"I suppose one must be serious sometimes.
Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o'clock.
Everything is  packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble."    "Good-bye, my son," she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.
She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and  there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.
"Kiss me, Mother," said the girl.
Her flowerlike lips touched the  withered cheek and warmed its frost.
"My child! my child!" cried Mrs.
Vane, looking up to the ceiling in  search of an imaginary gallery.
"Come, Sibyl," said her brother impatiently.
He hated his mother's  affectations.
They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled  down the dreary Euston Road.
The passersby glanced in wonder at the  sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the  company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl.
He was like a common  gardener walking with a rose.
Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of  some stranger.
He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on  geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace.
Sibyl,  however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing.
Her  love was trembling in laughter on her lips.
She was thinking of Prince  Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not  talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to  sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful  heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted  bushrangers.
For he was not to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or  whatever he was going to be.
Oh, no!  A sailor's existence was  dreadful.
Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse,  hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts  down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands!  He was to  leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain,  and go off at once to the gold-fields.
Before a week was over he was to  come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had  ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon  guarded by six mounted policemen.
The bushrangers were to attack them  three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter.
Or, no.
He was  not to go to the gold-fields at all.
They were horrid places, where  men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad  language.
He was to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was  riding home, he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a  robber on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her.
Of course,  she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get  married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London.
Yes,  there were delightful things in store for him.
But he must be very  good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly.
She was  only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more of life.
He  must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his  prayers each night before he went to sleep.
God was very good, and  would watch over him.
She would pray for him, too, and in a few years  he would come back quite rich and happy.
The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer.
He was heart-sick  at leaving home.
Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.
Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger  of Sibyl's position.
This young dandy who was making love to her could  mean her no good.
He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated  him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account,  and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him.
He was  conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother's nature,  and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl's happiness.
Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge  them; sometimes they forgive them.
His mother!  He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that  he had brooded on for many months of silence.
A chance phrase that he  had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears  one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of  horrible thoughts.
He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a  hunting-crop across his face.
His brows knit together into a wedge-like  furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.
"You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim," cried Sibyl, "and I  am making the most delightful plans for your future.
Do say something."    "What do you want me to say?"    "Oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered,  smiling at him.
He shrugged his shoulders.
"You are more likely to forget me than I am  to forget you, Sibyl."    She flushed.
"What do you mean, Jim?" she asked.
"You have a new friend, I hear.
Who is he?
Why have you not told me  about him?
He means you no good."    "Stop, Jim!" she exclaimed.
"You must not say anything against him.
I  love him."    "Why, you don't even know his name," answered the lad.
"Who is he?
I  have a right to know."    "He is called Prince Charming.
Don't you like the name.
Oh! you silly  boy! you should never forget it.
If you only saw him, you would think  him the most wonderful person in the world.
Some day you will meet  him--when you come back from Australia.
You will like him so much.
Everybody likes him, and I ...
love him.
I wish you could come to the  theatre to-night.
He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet.
Oh! how I shall play it!  Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet!  To have him sitting there!  To play for his delight!  I am afraid I may  frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them.
To be in love is to  surpass one's self.
Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting 'genius'  to his loafers at the bar.
He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he  will announce me as a revelation.
I feel it.
And it is all his, his  only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces.
But I am  poor beside him.
Poor?
What does that matter?
When poverty creeps in  at the door, love flies in through the window.
Our proverbs want  rewriting.
They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time  for me, I think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies."    "He is a gentleman," said the lad sullenly.
"A prince!" she cried musically.
"What more do you want?"    "He wants to enslave you."    "I shudder at the thought of being free."    "I want you to beware of him."    "To see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him."    "Sibyl, you are mad about him."    She laughed and took his arm.
"You dear old Jim, you talk as if you  were a hundred.
Some day you will be in love yourself.
Then you will  know what it is.
Don't look so sulky.
Surely you should be glad to  think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have  ever been before.
Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and  difficult.
But it will be different now.
You are going to a new  world, and I have found one.
Here are two chairs; let us sit down and  see the smart people go by."    They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers.
The tulip-beds  across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire.
A white  dust--tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed--hung in the panting air.
The brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous  butterflies.
She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects.
He  spoke slowly and with effort.
They passed words to each other as  players at a game pass counters.
Sibyl felt oppressed.
She could not  communicate her joy.
A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all  the echo she could win.
After some time she became silent.
Suddenly  she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open  carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.
She started to her feet.
"There he is!" she cried.
"Who?" said Jim Vane.
"Prince Charming," she answered, looking after the victoria.
He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm.
"Show him to me.
Which is he?
Point him out.
I must see him!" he exclaimed; but at  that moment the Duke of Berwick's four-in-hand came between, and when  it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.
"He is gone," murmured Sibyl sadly.
"I wish you had seen him."    "I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever does  you any wrong, I shall kill him."    She looked at him in horror.
He repeated his words.
They cut the air  like a dagger.
The people round began to gape.
A lady standing close  to her tittered.
"Come away, Jim; come away," she whispered.
He followed her doggedly  as she passed through the crowd.
He felt glad at what he had said.
When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round.
There was  pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips.
She shook her head  at him.
"You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy,  that is all.
How can you say such horrible things?
You don't know  what you are talking about.
You are simply jealous and unkind.
Ah!  I  wish you would fall in love.
Love makes people good, and what you said  was wicked."    "I am sixteen," he answered, "and I know what I am about.
Mother is no  help to you.
She doesn't understand how to look after you.
I wish now  that I was not going to Australia at all.
I have a great mind to chuck  the whole thing up.
I would, if my articles hadn't been signed."    "Oh, don't be so serious, Jim.
You are like one of the heroes of those  silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in.
I am not  going to quarrel with you.
I have seen him, and oh! to see him is  perfect happiness.
We won't quarrel.
I know you would never harm any  one I love, would you?"    "Not as long as you love him, I suppose," was the sullen answer.
"I shall love him for ever!" she cried.
"And he?"    "For ever, too!"    "He had better."    She shrank from him.
Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm.
He  was merely a boy.
At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to  their shabby home in the Euston Road.
It was after five o'clock, and  Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting.
Jim  insisted that she should do so.
He said that he would sooner part with  her when their mother was not present.
She would be sure to make a  scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.
In Sybil's own room they parted.
There was jealousy in the lad's  heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed  to him, had come between them.
Yet, when her arms were flung round his  neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed  her with real affection.
There were tears in his eyes as he went  downstairs.
His mother was waiting for him below.
She grumbled at his  unpunctuality, as he entered.
He made no answer, but sat down to his  meagre meal.
The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the  stained cloth.
Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of  street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that  was left to him.
After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his  hands.
He felt that he had a right to know.
It should have been told  to him before, if it was as he suspected.
Leaden with fear, his mother  watched him.
Words dropped mechanically from her lips.
A tattered  lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers.
When the clock struck six,  he got up and went to the door.
Then he turned back and looked at her.
Their eyes met.
In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy.
It enraged  him.
"Mother, I have something to ask you," he said.
Her eyes wandered  vaguely about the room.
She made no answer.
"Tell me the truth.
I  have a right to know.
Were you married to my father?"    She heaved a deep sigh.
It was a sigh of relief.
The terrible moment,  the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded,  had come at last, and yet she felt no terror.
Indeed, in some measure  it was a disappointment to her.
The vulgar directness of the question  called for a direct answer.
The situation had not been gradually led  up to.
It was crude.
It reminded her of a bad rehearsal.
"No," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.
"My father was a scoundrel then!" cried the lad, clenching his fists.
She shook her head.
"I knew he was not free.
We loved each other very  much.
If he had lived, he would have made provision for us.
Don't  speak against him, my son.
He was your father, and a gentleman.
Indeed, he was highly connected."    An oath broke from his lips.
"I don't care for myself," he exclaimed,  "but don't let Sibyl....
It is a gentleman, isn't it, who is in love  with her, or says he is?
Highly connected, too, I suppose."    For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman.
Her  head drooped.
She wiped her eyes with shaking hands.
"Sibyl has a  mother," she murmured; "I had none."    The lad was touched.
He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed  her.
"I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father," he  said, "but I could not help it.
I must go now.
Good-bye.
Don't forget  that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me  that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him  down, and kill him like a dog.
I swear it."    The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that  accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid  to her.
She was familiar with the atmosphere.
She breathed more  freely, and for the first time for many months she really admired her  son.
She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same  emotional scale, but he cut her short.
Trunks had to be carried down  and mufflers looked for.
The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out.
There was the bargaining with the cabman.
The moment was lost in  vulgar details.
It was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that  she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son  drove away.
She was conscious that a great opportunity had been  wasted.
She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt  her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after.
She  remembered the phrase.
It had pleased her.
Of the threat she said  nothing.
It was vividly and dramatically expressed.
She felt that  they would all laugh at it some day.
"I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?" said Lord Henry that  evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol  where dinner had been laid for three.
"No, Harry," answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing  waiter.
"What is it?
Nothing about politics, I hope!  They don't  interest me.
There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons  worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little  whitewashing."    "Dorian Gray is engaged to be married," said Lord Henry, watching him  as he spoke.
Hallward started and then frowned.
"Dorian engaged to be married!" he  cried.
"Impossible!"    "It is perfectly true."    "To whom?"    "To some little actress or other."    "I can't believe it.
Dorian is far too sensible."    "Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear  Basil."    "Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry."    "Except in America," rejoined Lord Henry languidly.
"But I didn't say  he was married.
I said he was engaged to be married.
There is a great  difference.
I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have  no recollection at all of being engaged.
I am inclined to think that I  never was engaged."    "But think of Dorian's birth, and position, and wealth.
It would be  absurd for him to marry so much beneath him."    "If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil.
He is  sure to do it, then.
Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it  is always from the noblest motives."    "I hope the girl is good, Harry.
I don't want to see Dorian tied to  some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his  intellect."    "Oh, she is better than good--she is beautiful," murmured Lord Henry,  sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters.
"Dorian says she is  beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind.
Your  portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal  appearance of other people.
It has had that excellent effect, amongst  others.
We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn't forget his  appointment."    "Are you serious?"    "Quite serious, Basil.
I should be miserable if I thought I should  ever be more serious than I am at the present moment."    "But do you approve of it, Harry?" asked the painter, walking up and  down the room and biting his lip.
"You can't approve of it, possibly.
It is some silly infatuation."    "I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now.
It is an absurd  attitude to take towards life.
We are not sent into the world to air  our moral prejudices.
I never take any notice of what common people  say, and I never interfere with what charming people do.
If a  personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality  selects is absolutely delightful to me.
Dorian Gray falls in love with  a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her.
Why not?
If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less interesting.
You  know I am not a champion of marriage.
The real drawback to marriage is  that it makes one unselfish.
And unselfish people are colourless.
They lack individuality.
Still, there are certain temperaments that  marriage makes more complex.
They retain their egotism, and add to it  many other egos.
They are forced to have more than one life.
They  become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should  fancy, the object of man's existence.
Besides, every experience is of  value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an  experience.
I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife,  passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become  fascinated by some one else.
He would be a wonderful study."    "You don't mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you don't.
If Dorian Gray's life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than  yourself.
You are much better than you pretend to be."    Lord Henry laughed.
"The reason we all like to think so well of others  is that we are all afraid for ourselves.
The basis of optimism is  sheer terror.
We think that we are generous because we credit our  neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a  benefit to us.
We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account,  and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare  our pockets.
I mean everything that I have said.
I have the greatest  contempt for optimism.
As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but  one whose growth is arrested.
If you want to mar a nature, you have  merely to reform it.
As for marriage, of course that would be silly,  but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women.
I will certainly encourage them.
They have the charm of being  fashionable.
But here is Dorian himself.
He will tell you more than I  can."    "My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!" said the  lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and  shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn.
"I have never been so  happy.
Of course, it is sudden--all really delightful things are.
And  yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my  life." He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked  extraordinarily handsome.
"I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian," said Hallward, "but I  don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement.
You let Harry know."    "And I don't forgive you for being late for dinner," broke in Lord  Henry, putting his hand on the lad's shoulder and smiling as he spoke.
"Come, let us sit down and try what the new _chef_ here is like, and then  you will tell us how it all came about."    "There is really not much to tell," cried Dorian as they took their  seats at the small round table.
"What happened was simply this.
After  I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that  little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and  went down at eight o'clock to the theatre.
Sibyl was playing Rosalind.
Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd.
But Sibyl!  You should have seen her!  When she came on in her boy's clothes, she  was perfectly wonderful.
She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with  cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little  green cap with a hawk's feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak  lined with dull red.
She had never seemed to me more exquisite.
She  had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in  your studio, Basil.
Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves  round a pale rose.
As for her acting--well, you shall see her  to-night.
She is simply a born artist.
I sat in the dingy box  absolutely enthralled.
I forgot that I was in London and in the  nineteenth century.
I was away with my love in a forest that no man  had ever seen.
After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke  to her.
As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes  a look that I had never seen there before.
My lips moved towards hers.
We kissed each other.
I can't describe to you what I felt at that  moment.
It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one  perfect point of rose-coloured joy.
She trembled all over and shook  like a white narcissus.
Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed  my hands.
I feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can't help  it.
Of course, our engagement is a dead secret.
She has not even told  her own mother.
I don't know what my guardians will say.
Lord Radley  is sure to be furious.
I don't care.
I shall be of age in less than a  year, and then I can do what I like.
I have been right, Basil, haven't  I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare's  plays?
Lips that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their  secret in my ear.
I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and  kissed Juliet on the mouth."    "Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right," said Hallward slowly.
"Have you seen her to-day?" asked Lord Henry.
Dorian Gray shook his head.
"I left her in the forest of Arden; I  shall find her in an orchard in Verona."    Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner.
"At what  particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian?
And what  did she say in answer?
Perhaps you forgot all about it."    "My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did  not make any formal proposal.
I told her that I loved her, and she  said she was not worthy to be my wife.
Not worthy!  Why, the whole  world is nothing to me compared with her."    "Women are wonderfully practical," murmured Lord Henry, "much more  practical than we are.
In situations of that kind we often forget to  say anything about marriage, and they always remind us."    Hallward laid his hand upon his arm.
"Don't, Harry.
You have annoyed  Dorian.
He is not like other men.
He would never bring misery upon  any one.
His nature is too fine for that."    Lord Henry looked across the table.
"Dorian is never annoyed with me,"  he answered.
"I asked the question for the best reason possible, for  the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any  question--simple curiosity.
I have a theory that it is always the  women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women.
Except,  of course, in middle-class life.
But then the middle classes are not  modern."    Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head.
"You are quite incorrigible,  Harry; but I don't mind.
It is impossible to be angry with you.
When  you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her  would be a beast, a beast without a heart.
I cannot understand how any  one can wish to shame the thing he loves.
I love Sibyl Vane.
I want  to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the  woman who is mine.
What is marriage?
An irrevocable vow.
You mock at  it for that.
Ah! don't mock.
It is an irrevocable vow that I want to  take.
Her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good.
When I  am with her, I regret all that you have taught me.
I become different  from what you have known me to be.
I am changed, and the mere touch of  Sibyl Vane's hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating,  poisonous, delightful theories."    "And those are ...?" asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.
"Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories  about pleasure.
All your theories, in fact, Harry."    "Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about," he answered  in his slow melodious voice.
"But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory  as my own.
It belongs to Nature, not to me.
Pleasure is Nature's  test, her sign of approval.
When we are happy, we are always good, but  when we are good, we are not always happy."    "Ah! but what do you mean by good?" cried Basil Hallward.
"Yes," echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord  Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the  centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, Harry?"    "To be good is to be in harmony with one's self," he replied, touching  the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.
"Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others.
One's own  life--that is the important thing.
As for the lives of one's  neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt  one's moral views about them, but they are not one's concern.
Besides,  individualism has really the higher aim.
Modern morality consists in  accepting the standard of one's age.
I consider that for any man of  culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest  immorality."    "But, surely, if one lives merely for one's self, Harry, one pays a  terrible price for doing so?" suggested the painter.
"Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays.
I should fancy that  the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but  self-denial.
Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege  of the rich."    "One has to pay in other ways but money."    "What sort of ways, Basil?"    "Oh!  I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ...
well, in the  consciousness of degradation."    Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"My dear fellow, mediaeval art is  charming, but mediaeval emotions are out of date.
One can use them in  fiction, of course.
But then the only things that one can use in  fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact.
Believe me,  no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever  knows what a pleasure is."    "I know what pleasure is," cried Dorian Gray.
"It is to adore some  one."    "That is certainly better than being adored," he answered, toying with  some fruits.
"Being adored is a nuisance.
Women treat us just as  humanity treats its gods.
They worship us, and are always bothering us  to do something for them."    "I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to  us," murmured the lad gravely.
"They create love in our natures.
They  have a right to demand it back."    "That is quite true, Dorian," cried Hallward.
"Nothing is ever quite true," said Lord Henry.
"This is," interrupted Dorian.
"You must admit, Harry, that women give  to men the very gold of their lives."    "Possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such very  small change.
That is the worry.
Women, as some witty Frenchman once  put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always  prevent us from carrying them out."    "Harry, you are dreadful!  I don't know why I like you so much."    "You will always like me, Dorian," he replied.
"Will you have some  coffee, you fellows?
Waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and  some cigarettes.
No, don't mind the cigarettes--I have some.
Basil, I  can't allow you to smoke cigars.
You must have a cigarette.
A  cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure.
It is exquisite,  and it leaves one unsatisfied.
What more can one want?
Yes, Dorian,  you will always be fond of me.
I represent to you all the sins you  have never had the courage to commit."    "What nonsense you talk, Harry!" cried the lad, taking a light from a  fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
"Let us go down to the theatre.
When Sibyl comes on the stage you will  have a new ideal of life.
She will represent something to you that you  have never known."    "I have known everything," said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his  eyes, "but I am always ready for a new emotion.
I am afraid, however,  that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing.
Still, your  wonderful girl may thrill me.
I love acting.
It is so much more real  than life.
Let us go.
Dorian, you will come with me.
I am so sorry,  Basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham.
You must follow  us in a hansom."    They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing.
The  painter was silent and preoccupied.
There was a gloom over him.
He  could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better  than many other things that might have happened.
After a few minutes,  they all passed downstairs.
He drove off by himself, as had been  arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in  front of him.
A strange sense of loss came over him.
He felt that  Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the  past.
Life had come between them....
His eyes darkened, and the  crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes.
When the cab drew  up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.
For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat  Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with  an oily tremulous smile.
He escorted them to their box with a sort of  pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top  of his voice.
Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever.
He felt as if  he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban.
Lord  Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him.
At least he declared he  did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he  was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone  bankrupt over a poet.
Hallward amused himself with watching the faces  in the pit.
The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight  flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire.
The youths  in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them  over the side.
They talked to each other across the theatre and shared  their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them.
Some women  were laughing in the pit.
Their voices were horribly shrill and  discordant.
The sound of the popping of corks came from the bar.
"What a place to find one's divinity in!" said Lord Henry.
"Yes!" answered Dorian Gray.
"It was here I found her, and she is  divine beyond all living things.
When she acts, you will forget  everything.
These common rough people, with their coarse faces and  brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage.
They  sit silently and watch her.
They weep and laugh as she wills them to  do.
She makes them as responsive as a violin.
She spiritualizes them,  and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one's self."    "The same flesh and blood as one's self!  Oh, I hope not!" exclaimed  Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his  opera-glass.
"Don't pay any attention to him, Dorian," said the painter.
"I  understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl.
Any one you love  must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must  be fine and noble.
To spiritualize one's age--that is something worth  doing.
If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without  one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have  been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and  lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of  all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world.
This  marriage is quite right.
I did not think so at first, but I admit it  now.
The gods made Sibyl Vane for you.
Without her you would have  been incomplete."    "Thanks, Basil," answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand.
"I knew that  you would understand me.
Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me.
But  here is the orchestra.
It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for  about five minutes.
Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl  to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything  that is good in me."    A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of  applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage.
Yes, she was certainly  lovely to look at--one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought,  that he had ever seen.
There was something of the fawn in her shy  grace and startled eyes.
A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a  mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded  enthusiastic house.
She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed  to tremble.
Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud.
Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her.
Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, "Charming! charming!"    The scene was the hall of Capulet's house, and Romeo in his pilgrim's  dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends.
The band, such  as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began.
Through  the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a  creature from a finer world.
Her body swayed, while she danced, as a  plant sways in the water.
The curves of her throat were the curves of  a white lily.
Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.
Yet she was curiously listless.
She showed no sign of joy when her  eyes rested on Romeo.
The few words she had to speak--        Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,          Which mannerly devotion shows in this;      For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,          And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss--    with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly  artificial manner.
The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view  of tone it was absolutely false.
It was wrong in colour.
It took away  all the life from the verse.
It made the passion unreal.
Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her.
He was puzzled and anxious.
Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him.
She seemed to  them to be absolutely incompetent.
They were horribly disappointed.
Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of  the second act.
They waited for that.
If she failed there, there was  nothing in her.
She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight.
That could not  be denied.
But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew  worse as she went on.
Her gestures became absurdly artificial.
She  overemphasized everything that she had to say.
The beautiful passage--        Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,      Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek      For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night--    was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been  taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution.
When she  leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines--            Although I joy in thee,      I have no joy of this contract to-night:      It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;      Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be      Ere one can say, "It lightens."  Sweet, good-night!      This bud of love by summer's ripening breath      May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet--    she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her.
It was  not nervousness.
Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely  self-contained.
It was simply bad art.
She was a complete failure.
Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their  interest in the play.
They got restless, and began to talk loudly and  to whistle.
The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the  dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage.
The only person unmoved was  the girl herself.
When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord  Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat.
"She is quite  beautiful, Dorian," he said, "but she can't act.
Let us go."    "I am going to see the play through," answered the lad, in a hard  bitter voice.
"I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an  evening, Harry.
I apologize to you both."    "My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill," interrupted  Hallward.
"We will come some other night."    "I wish she were ill," he rejoined.
"But she seems to me to be simply  callous and cold.
She has entirely altered.
Last night she was a  great artist.
This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre  actress."    "Don't talk like that about any one you love, Dorian.
Love is a more  wonderful thing than art."    "They are both simply forms of imitation," remarked Lord Henry.
"But  do let us go.
Dorian, you must not stay here any longer.
It is not  good for one's morals to see bad acting.
Besides, I don't suppose you  will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet  like a wooden doll?
She is very lovely, and if she knows as little  about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful  experience.
There are only two kinds of people who are really  fascinating--people who know absolutely everything, and people who know  absolutely nothing.
Good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic!  The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is  unbecoming.
Come to the club with Basil and myself.
We will smoke  cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane.
She is beautiful.
What more can you want?"    "Go away, Harry," cried the lad.
"I want to be alone.
Basil, you must  go.
Ah! can't you see that my heart is breaking?"  The hot tears came  to his eyes.
His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he  leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.
"Let us go, Basil," said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his  voice, and the two young men passed out together.
A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose  on the third act.
Dorian Gray went back to his seat.
He looked pale,  and proud, and indifferent.
The play dragged on, and seemed  interminable.
Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots  and laughing.
The whole thing was a _fiasco_.
The last act was played  to almost empty benches.
The curtain went down on a titter and some  groans.
As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the  greenroom.
The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph  on her face.
Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire.
There was a  radiance about her.
Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of  their own.
When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy  came over her.
"How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!" she cried.
"Horribly!" he answered, gazing at her in amazement.
"Horribly!  It  was dreadful.
Are you ill?
You have no idea what it was.
You have no  idea what I suffered."    The girl smiled.
"Dorian," she answered, lingering over his name with  long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to  the red petals of her mouth.
"Dorian, you should have understood.
But  you understand now, don't you?"    "Understand what?" he asked, angrily.
"Why I was so bad to-night.
Why I shall always be bad.
Why I shall  never act well again."    He shrugged his shoulders.
"You are ill, I suppose.
When you are ill  you shouldn't act.
You make yourself ridiculous.
My friends were  bored.
I was bored."    She seemed not to listen to him.
She was transfigured with joy.
An  ecstasy of happiness dominated her.
"Dorian, Dorian," she cried, "before I knew you, acting was the one  reality of my life.
It was only in the theatre that I lived.
I  thought that it was all true.
I was Rosalind one night and Portia the  other.
The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia  were mine also.
I believed in everything.
The common people who acted  with me seemed to me to be godlike.
The painted scenes were my world.
I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real.
You came--oh, my  beautiful love!--and you freed my soul from prison.
You taught me what  reality really is.
To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw  through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in  which I had always played.
To-night, for the first time, I became  conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the  moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and  that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not  what I wanted to say.
You had brought me something higher, something  of which all art is but a reflection.
You had made me understand what  love really is.
My love!  My love!  Prince Charming!  Prince of life!  I have grown sick of shadows.
You are more to me than all art can ever  be.
What have I to do with the puppets of a play?
When I came on  to-night, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone  from me.
I thought that I was going to be wonderful.
I found that I  could do nothing.
Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant.
The knowledge was exquisite to me.
I heard them hissing, and I smiled.
What could they know of love such as ours?
Take me away, Dorian--take  me away with you, where we can be quite alone.
I hate the stage.
I  might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that  burns me like fire.
Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it  signifies?
Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to  play at being in love.
You have made me see that."    He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face.
"You have  killed my love," he muttered.
She looked at him in wonder and laughed.
He made no answer.
She came  across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair.
She knelt  down and pressed his hands to her lips.
He drew them away, and a  shudder ran through him.
Then he leaped up and went to the door.
"Yes," he cried, "you have  killed my love.
You used to stir my imagination.
Now you don't even  stir my curiosity.
You simply produce no effect.
I loved you because  you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you  realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the  shadows of art.
You have thrown it all away.
You are shallow and  stupid.
My God! how mad I was to love you!  What a fool I have been!  You are nothing to me now.
I will never see you again.
I will never  think of you.
I will never mention your name.
You don't know what you  were to me, once.
Why, once ...
Oh, I can't bear to think of it!  I  wish I had never laid eyes upon you!  You have spoiled the romance of  my life.
How little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art!  Without your art, you are nothing.
I would have made you famous,  splendid, magnificent.
The world would have worshipped you, and you  would have borne my name.
What are you now?
A third-rate actress with  a pretty face."    The girl grew white, and trembled.
She clenched her hands together,  and her voice seemed to catch in her throat.
"You are not serious,  Dorian?" she murmured.
"You are acting."    "Acting!  I leave that to you.
You do it so well," he answered  bitterly.
She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her  face, came across the room to him.
She put her hand upon his arm and  looked into his eyes.
He thrust her back.
"Don't touch me!" he cried.
A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay  there like a trampled flower.
"Dorian, Dorian, don't leave me!" she  whispered.
"I am so sorry I didn't act well.
I was thinking of you  all the time.
But I will try--indeed, I will try.
It came so suddenly  across me, my love for you.
I think I should never have known it if  you had not kissed me--if we had not kissed each other.
Kiss me again,  my love.
Don't go away from me.
I couldn't bear it.
Oh! don't go  away from me.
My brother ...
No; never mind.
He didn't mean it.
He  was in jest....
But you, oh! can't you forgive me for to-night?
I will  work so hard and try to improve.
Don't be cruel to me, because I love  you better than anything in the world.
After all, it is only once that  I have not pleased you.
But you are quite right, Dorian.
I should  have shown myself more of an artist.
It was foolish of me, and yet I  couldn't help it.
Oh, don't leave me, don't leave me." A fit of  passionate sobbing choked her.
She crouched on the floor like a  wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at  her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain.
There is  always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has  ceased to love.
Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic.
Her tears and sobs annoyed him.
"I am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice.
"I don't wish  to be unkind, but I can't see you again.
You have disappointed me."    She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer.
Her little  hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him.
He  turned on his heel and left the room.
In a few moments he was out of  the theatre.
Where he went to he hardly knew.
He remembered wandering through dimly  lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking  houses.
Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after  him.
Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves  like monstrous apes.
He had seen grotesque children huddled upon  door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.
As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden.
The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed  itself into a perfect pearl.
Huge carts filled with nodding lilies  rumbled slowly down the polished empty street.
The air was heavy with  the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an  anodyne for his pain.
He followed into the market and watched the men  unloading their waggons.
A white-smocked carter offered him some  cherries.
He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money  for them, and began to eat them listlessly.
They had been plucked at  midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them.
A long  line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red  roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge,  jade-green piles of vegetables.
Under the portico, with its grey,  sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls,  waiting for the auction to be over.
Others crowded round the swinging  doors of the coffee-house in the piazza.
The heavy cart-horses slipped  and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings.
Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks.
Iris-necked  and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.
After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home.
For a few  moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent  square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.
The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like  silver against it.
From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke  was rising.
It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.
In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge's barge, that  hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance,  lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals  of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire.
He turned them out and,  having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library  towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the  ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had  decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries  that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal.
As  he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait  Basil Hallward had painted of him.
He started back as if in surprise.
Then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled.
After he  had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate.
Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it.
In  the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk  blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed.
The  expression looked different.
One would have said that there was a  touch of cruelty in the mouth.
It was certainly strange.
He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind.
The  bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky  corners, where they lay shuddering.
But the strange expression that he  had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be  more intensified even.
The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the  lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking  into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.
He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory  Cupids, one of Lord Henry's many presents to him, glanced hurriedly  into its polished depths.
No line like that warped his red lips.
What  did it mean?
He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it  again.
There were no signs of any change when he looked into the  actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression  had altered.
It was not a mere fancy of his own.
The thing was  horribly apparent.
He threw himself into a chair and began to think.
Suddenly there  flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward's studio the  day the picture had been finished.
Yes, he remembered it perfectly.
He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the  portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the  face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that  the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and  thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness  of his then just conscious boyhood.
Surely his wish had not been  fulfilled?
Such things were impossible.
It seemed monstrous even to  think of them.
And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the  touch of cruelty in the mouth.
Cruelty!  Had he been cruel?
It was the girl's fault, not his.
He had  dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he  had thought her great.
Then she had disappointed him.
She had been  shallow and unworthy.
And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over  him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little  child.
He remembered with what callousness he had watched her.
Why  had he been made like that?
Why had such a soul been given to him?
But he had suffered also.
During the three terrible hours that the  play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of  torture.
His life was well worth hers.
She had marred him for a  moment, if he had wounded her for an age.
Besides, women were better  suited to bear sorrow than men.
They lived on their emotions.
They  only thought of their emotions.
When they took lovers, it was merely  to have some one with whom they could have scenes.
Lord Henry had told  him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were.
Why should he trouble  about Sibyl Vane?
She was nothing to him now.
But the picture?
What was he to say of that?
It held the secret of  his life, and told his story.
It had taught him to love his own  beauty.
Would it teach him to loathe his own soul?
Would he ever look  at it again?
No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses.
The  horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it.
Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that  makes men mad.
The picture had not changed.
It was folly to think so.
Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel  smile.
Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight.
Its blue eyes  met his own.
A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the  painted image of himself, came over him.
It had altered already, and  would alter more.
Its gold would wither into grey.
Its red and white  roses would die.
For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck  and wreck its fairness.
But he would not sin.
The picture, changed or  unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience.
He would  resist temptation.
He would not see Lord Henry any more--would not, at  any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil  Hallward's garden had first stirred within him the passion for  impossible things.
He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends,  marry her, try to love her again.
Yes, it was his duty to do so.
She  must have suffered more than he had.
Poor child!  He had been selfish  and cruel to her.
The fascination that she had exercised over him  would return.
They would be happy together.
His life with her would  be beautiful and pure.
He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the  portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it.
"How horrible!" he murmured  to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it.
When he  stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath.
The fresh morning  air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions.
He thought only of  Sibyl.
A faint echo of his love came back to him.
He repeated her  name over and over again.
The birds that were singing in the  dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.
It was long past noon when he awoke.
His valet had crept several times  on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered  what made his young master sleep so late.
Finally his bell sounded,  and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on  a small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin  curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the  three tall windows.
"Monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling.
"What o'clock is it, Victor?" asked Dorian Gray drowsily.
"One hour and a quarter, Monsieur."    How late it was!  He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over  his letters.
One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by  hand that morning.
He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside.
The others he opened listlessly.
They contained the usual collection  of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes  of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable  young men every morning during the season.
There was a rather heavy  bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet  had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely  old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when  unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several  very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders  offering to advance any sum of money at a moment's notice and at the  most reasonable rates of interest.
After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate  dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the  onyx-paved bathroom.
The cool water refreshed him after his long  sleep.
He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through.
A  dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once  or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.
As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a  light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round  table close to the open window.
It was an exquisite day.
The warm air  seemed laden with spices.
A bee flew in and buzzed round the  blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before  him.
He felt perfectly happy.
Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the  portrait, and he started.
"Too cold for Monsieur?" asked his valet, putting an omelette on the  table.
"I shut the window?"    Dorian shook his head.
"I am not cold," he murmured.
Was it all true?
Had the portrait really changed?
Or had it been  simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where  there had been a look of joy?
Surely a painted canvas could not alter?
The thing was absurd.
It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day.
It would make him smile.
And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing!  First in  the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of  cruelty round the warped lips.
He almost dreaded his valet leaving the  room.
He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the  portrait.
He was afraid of certainty.
When the coffee and cigarettes  had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to  tell him to remain.
As the door was closing behind him, he called him  back.
The man stood waiting for his orders.
Dorian looked at him for  a moment.
"I am not at home to any one, Victor," he said with a sigh.
The man bowed and retired.
Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on  a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen.
The screen  was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a  rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern.
He scanned it curiously,  wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man's life.
Should he move it aside, after all?
Why not let it stay there?
What  was the use of knowing?
If the thing was true, it was terrible.
If it  was not true, why trouble about it?
But what if, by some fate or  deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible  change?
What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at  his own picture?
Basil would be sure to do that.
No; the thing had to  be examined, and at once.
Anything would be better than this dreadful  state of doubt.
He got up and locked both doors.
At least he would be alone when he  looked upon the mask of his shame.
Then he drew the screen aside and  saw himself face to face.
It was perfectly true.
The portrait had  altered.
As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he  found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost  scientific interest.
That such a change should have taken place was  incredible to him.
And yet it was a fact.
Was there some subtle  affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form  and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him?
Could it be  that what that soul thought, they realized?--that what it dreamed, they  made true?
Or was there some other, more terrible reason?
He  shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there,  gazing at the picture in sickened horror.
One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him.
It had made him  conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane.
It was not  too late to make reparation for that.
She could still be his wife.
His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would  be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil  Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would  be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the  fear of God to us all.
There were opiates for remorse, drugs that  could lull the moral sense to sleep.
But here was a visible symbol of  the degradation of sin.
Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men  brought upon their souls.
Three o'clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double  chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir.
He was trying to gather up the  scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his  way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was  wandering.
He did not know what to do, or what to think.
Finally, he  went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had  loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness.
He  covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of  pain.
There is a luxury in self-reproach.
When we blame ourselves, we  feel that no one else has a right to blame us.
It is the confession,  not the priest, that gives us absolution.
When Dorian had finished the  letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.
Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry's  voice outside.
"My dear boy, I must see you.
Let me in at once.
I  can't bear your shutting yourself up like this."    He made no answer at first, but remained quite still.
The knocking  still continued and grew louder.
Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry  in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel  with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was  inevitable.
He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture,  and unlocked the door.
"I am so sorry for it all, Dorian," said Lord Henry as he entered.
"But you must not think too much about it."    "Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?" asked the lad.
"Yes, of course," answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly  pulling off his yellow gloves.
"It is dreadful, from one point of  view, but it was not your fault.
Tell me, did you go behind and see  her, after the play was over?"    "Yes."    "I felt sure you had.
Did you make a scene with her?"    "I was brutal, Harry--perfectly brutal.
But it is all right now.
I am  not sorry for anything that has happened.
It has taught me to know  myself better."    "Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way!  I was afraid I  would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of  yours."    "I have got through all that," said Dorian, shaking his head and  smiling.
"I am perfectly happy now.
I know what conscience is, to  begin with.
It is not what you told me it was.
It is the divinest  thing in us.
Don't sneer at it, Harry, any more--at least not before  me.
I want to be good.
I can't bear the idea of my soul being  hideous."    "A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian!  I congratulate you  on it.
But how are you going to begin?"    "By marrying Sibyl Vane."    "Marrying Sibyl Vane!" cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him  in perplexed amazement.
"But, my dear Dorian--"    "Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say.
Something dreadful  about marriage.
Don't say it.
Don't ever say things of that kind to  me again.
Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me.
I am not going to  break my word to her.
She is to be my wife."    "Your wife!  Dorian! ...
Didn't you get my letter?
I wrote to you this  morning, and sent the note down by my own man."    "Your letter?
Oh, yes, I remember.
I have not read it yet, Harry.
I  was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn't like.
You  cut life to pieces with your epigrams."    "You know nothing then?"    "What do you mean?"    Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray,  took both his hands in his own and held them tightly.
"Dorian," he  said, "my letter--don't be frightened--was to tell you that Sibyl Vane  is dead."    A cry of pain broke from the lad's lips, and he leaped to his feet,  tearing his hands away from Lord Henry's grasp.
"Dead!  Sibyl dead!  It is not true!  It is a horrible lie!  How dare you say it?"    "It is quite true, Dorian," said Lord Henry, gravely.
"It is in all  the morning papers.
I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one  till I came.
There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must  not be mixed up in it.
Things like that make a man fashionable in  Paris.
But in London people are so prejudiced.
Here, one should never  make one's _debut_ with a scandal.
One should reserve that to give an  interest to one's old age.
I suppose they don't know your name at the  theatre?
If they don't, it is all right.
Did any one see you going  round to her room?
That is an important point."    Dorian did not answer for a few moments.
He was dazed with horror.
Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, "Harry, did you say an  inquest?
What did you mean by that?
Did Sibyl--?
Oh, Harry, I can't  bear it!  But be quick.
Tell me everything at once."    "I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put  in that way to the public.
It seems that as she was leaving the  theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had  forgotten something upstairs.
They waited some time for her, but she  did not come down again.
They ultimately found her lying dead on the  floor of her dressing-room.
She had swallowed something by mistake,  some dreadful thing they use at theatres.
I don't know what it was,  but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it.
I should fancy it  was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously."    "Harry, Harry, it is terrible!" cried the lad.
"Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed  up in it.
I see by _The Standard_ that she was seventeen.
I should have  thought she was almost younger than that.
She looked such a child, and  seemed to know so little about acting.
Dorian, you mustn't let this  thing get on your nerves.
You must come and dine with me, and  afterwards we will look in at the opera.
It is a Patti night, and  everybody will be there.
You can come to my sister's box.
She has got  some smart women with her."    "So I have murdered Sibyl Vane," said Dorian Gray, half to himself,  "murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife.
Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that.
The birds sing just as  happily in my garden.
And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go  on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards.
How  extraordinarily dramatic life is!  If I had read all this in a book,  Harry, I think I would have wept over it.
Somehow, now that it has  happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.
Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my  life.
Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been  addressed to a dead girl.
Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent  people we call the dead?
Sibyl!  Can she feel, or know, or listen?
Oh, Harry, how I loved her once!  It seems years ago to me now.
She  was everything to me.
Then came that dreadful night--was it really  only last night?--when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke.
She explained it all to me.
It was terribly pathetic.
But I was not  moved a bit.
I thought her shallow.
Suddenly something happened that  made me afraid.
I can't tell you what it was, but it was terrible.
I  said I would go back to her.
I felt I had done wrong.
And now she is  dead.
My God!  My God!  Harry, what shall I do?
You don't know the  danger I am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight.
She would  have done that for me.
She had no right to kill herself.
It was  selfish of her."    "My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case  and producing a gold-latten matchbox, "the only way a woman can ever  reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible  interest in life.
If you had married this girl, you would have been  wretched.
Of course, you would have treated her kindly.
One can  always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing.
But she would  have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her.
And  when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes  dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman's  husband has to pay for.
I say nothing about the social mistake, which  would have been abject--which, of course, I would not have allowed--but  I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an  absolute failure."    "I suppose it would," muttered the lad, walking up and down the room  and looking horribly pale.
"But I thought it was my duty.
It is not  my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was  right.
I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good  resolutions--that they are always made too late.
Mine certainly were."    "Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific  laws.
Their origin is pure vanity.
Their result is absolutely _nil_.
They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions  that have a certain charm for the weak.
That is all that can be said  for them.
They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they  have no account."    "Harry," cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him,  "why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to?
I  don't think I am heartless.
Do you?"    "You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be  entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian," answered Lord Henry with  his sweet melancholy smile.
The lad frowned.
"I don't like that explanation, Harry," he rejoined,  "but I am glad you don't think I am heartless.
I am nothing of the  kind.
I know I am not.
And yet I must admit that this thing that has  happened does not affect me as it should.
It seems to me to be simply  like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play.
It has all the terrible  beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but  by which I have not been wounded."    "It is an interesting question," said Lord Henry, who found an  exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad's unconscious egotism, "an  extremely interesting question.
I fancy that the true explanation is  this:  It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such  an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their  absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack  of style.
They affect us just as vulgarity affects us.
They give us  an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that.
Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of  beauty crosses our lives.
If these elements of beauty are real, the  whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect.
Suddenly  we find that we are no longer the actors, but the spectators of the  play.
Or rather we are both.
We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder  of the spectacle enthralls us.
In the present case, what is it that  has really happened?
Some one has killed herself for love of you.
I  wish that I had ever had such an experience.
It would have made me in  love with love for the rest of my life.
The people who have adored  me--there have not been very many, but there have been some--have  always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them,  or they to care for me.
They have become stout and tedious, and when I  meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences.
That awful memory of  woman!  What a fearful thing it is!  And what an utter intellectual  stagnation it reveals!  One should absorb the colour of life, but one  should never remember its details.
Details are always vulgar."    "I must sow poppies in my garden," sighed Dorian.
"There is no necessity," rejoined his companion.
"Life has always  poppies in her hands.
Of course, now and then things linger.
I once  wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic  mourning for a romance that would not die.
Ultimately, however, it did  die.
I forget what killed it.
I think it was her proposing to  sacrifice the whole world for me.
That is always a dreadful moment.
It fills one with the terror of eternity.
Well--would you believe  it?--a week ago, at Lady Hampshire's, I found myself seated at dinner  next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole  thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future.
I had  buried my romance in a bed of asphodel.
She dragged it out again and  assured me that I had spoiled her life.
I am bound to state that she  ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety.
But what a lack  of taste she showed!  The one charm of the past is that it is the past.
But women never know when the curtain has fallen.
They always want a  sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over,  they propose to continue it.
If they were allowed their own way, every  comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in  a farce.
They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of  art.
You are more fortunate than I am.
I assure you, Dorian, that not  one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane  did for you.
Ordinary women always console themselves.
Some of them  do it by going in for sentimental colours.
Never trust a woman who  wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who  is fond of pink ribbons.
It always means that they have a history.
Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good  qualities of their husbands.
They flaunt their conjugal felicity in  one's face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins.
Religion  consoles some.
Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a  woman once told me, and I can quite understand it.
Besides, nothing  makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner.
Conscience makes  egotists of us all.
Yes; there is really no end to the consolations  that women find in modern life.
Indeed, I have not mentioned the most  important one."    "What is that, Harry?" said the lad listlessly.
"Oh, the obvious consolation.
Taking some one else's admirer when one  loses one's own.
In good society that always whitewashes a woman.
But  really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the  women one meets!  There is something to me quite beautiful about her  death.
I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen.
They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with,  such as romance, passion, and love."    "I was terribly cruel to her.
You forget that."    "I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more  than anything else.
They have wonderfully primitive instincts.
We  have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their  masters, all the same.
They love being dominated.
I am sure you were  splendid.
I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can  fancy how delightful you looked.
And, after all, you said something to  me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely  fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key  to everything."    "What was that, Harry?"    "You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of  romance--that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that  if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen."    "She will never come to life again now," muttered the lad, burying his  face in his hands.
"No, she will never come to life.
She has played her last part.
But  you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply  as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful  scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur.
The girl never really  lived, and so she has never really died.
To you at least she was  always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare's plays and  left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare's  music sounded richer and more full of joy.
The moment she touched  actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away.
Mourn for Ophelia, if you like.
Put ashes on your head because  Cordelia was strangled.
Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of  Brabantio died.
But don't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane.
She was  less real than they are."    There was a silence.
The evening darkened in the room.
Noiselessly,  and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden.
The  colours faded wearily out of things.
After some time Dorian Gray looked up.
"You have explained me to  myself, Harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief.
"I  felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I  could not express it to myself.
How well you know me!  But we will not  talk again of what has happened.
It has been a marvellous experience.
That is all.
I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as  marvellous."    "Life has everything in store for you, Dorian.
There is nothing that  you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do."    "But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled?
What  then?"    "Ah, then," said Lord Henry, rising to go, "then, my dear Dorian, you  would have to fight for your victories.
As it is, they are brought to  you.
No, you must keep your good looks.
We live in an age that reads  too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful.
We  cannot spare you.
And now you had better dress and drive down to the  club.
We are rather late, as it is."    "I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry.
I feel too tired to eat  anything.
What is the number of your sister's box?"    "Twenty-seven, I believe.
It is on the grand tier.
You will see her  name on the door.
But I am sorry you won't come and dine."    "I don't feel up to it," said Dorian listlessly.
"But I am awfully  obliged to you for all that you have said to me.
You are certainly my  best friend.
No one has ever understood me as you have."    "We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian," answered Lord  Henry, shaking him by the hand.
"Good-bye.
I shall see you before  nine-thirty, I hope.
Remember, Patti is singing."    As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in  a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down.
He waited impatiently for him to go.
The man seemed to take an  interminable time over everything.
As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back.
No;  there was no further change in the picture.
It had received the news  of Sibyl Vane's death before he had known of it himself.
It was  conscious of the events of life as they occurred.
The vicious cruelty  that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the  very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was.
Or  was it indifferent to results?
Did it merely take cognizance of what  passed within the soul?
He wondered, and hoped that some day he would  see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he  hoped it.
Poor Sibyl!  What a romance it had all been!  She had often mimicked  death on the stage.
Then Death himself had touched her and taken her  with him.
How had she played that dreadful last scene?
Had she cursed  him, as she died?
No; she had died for love of him, and love would  always be a sacrament to him now.
She had atoned for everything by the  sacrifice she had made of her life.
He would not think any more of  what she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the  theatre.
When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic  figure sent on to the world's stage to show the supreme reality of  love.
A wonderful tragic figure?
Tears came to his eyes as he  remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy  tremulous grace.
He brushed them away hastily and looked again at the  picture.
He felt that the time had really come for making his choice.
Or had  his choice already been made?
Yes, life had decided that for  him--life, and his own infinite curiosity about life.
Eternal youth,  infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder  sins--he was to have all these things.
The portrait was to bear the  burden of his shame: that was all.
A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that  was in store for the fair face on the canvas.
Once, in boyish mockery  of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips  that now smiled so cruelly at him.
Morning after morning he had sat  before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as  it seemed to him at times.
Was it to alter now with every mood to  which he yielded?
Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to  be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that  had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair?
The pity of it! the pity of it!    For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that  existed between him and the picture might cease.
It had changed in  answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain  unchanged.
And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would  surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that  chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?
Besides, was it really under his control?
Had it indeed been prayer  that had produced the substitution?
Might there not be some curious  scientific reason for it all?
If thought could exercise its influence  upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon  dead and inorganic things?
Nay, without thought or conscious desire,  might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods  and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity?
But the reason was of no importance.
He would never again tempt by a  prayer any terrible power.
If the picture was to alter, it was to  alter.
That was all.
Why inquire too closely into it?
For there would be a real pleasure in watching it.
He would be able to  follow his mind into its secret places.
This portrait would be to him  the most magical of mirrors.
As it had revealed to him his own body,  so it would reveal to him his own soul.
And when winter came upon it,  he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of  summer.
When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid  mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood.
Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade.
Not one pulse of  his life would ever weaken.
Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be  strong, and fleet, and joyous.
What did it matter what happened to the  coloured image on the canvas?
He would be safe.
That was everything.
He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture,  smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was  already waiting for him.
An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord  Henry was leaning over his chair.
As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was shown  into the room.
"I am so glad I have found you, Dorian," he said gravely.
"I called  last night, and they told me you were at the opera.
Of course, I knew  that was impossible.
But I wish you had left word where you had really  gone to.
I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy  might be followed by another.
I think you might have telegraphed for  me when you heard of it first.
I read of it quite by chance in a late  edition of _The Globe_ that I picked up at the club.
I came here at once  and was miserable at not finding you.
I can't tell you how  heart-broken I am about the whole thing.
I know what you must suffer.
But where were you?
Did you go down and see the girl's mother?
For a  moment I thought of following you there.
They gave the address in the  paper.
Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn't it?
But I was afraid of  intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten.
Poor woman!  What a  state she must be in!  And her only child, too!  What did she say about  it all?"    "My dear Basil, how do I know?" murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some  pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass  and looking dreadfully bored.
"I was at the opera.
You should have  come on there.
I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry's sister, for the first  time.
We were in her box.
She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang  divinely.
Don't talk about horrid subjects.
If one doesn't talk about  a thing, it has never happened.
It is simply expression, as Harry  says, that gives reality to things.
I may mention that she was not the  woman's only child.
There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe.
But  he is not on the stage.
He is a sailor, or something.
And now, tell  me about yourself and what you are painting."    "You went to the opera?" said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a  strained touch of pain in his voice.
"You went to the opera while  Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging?
You can talk to me  of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before  the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in?
Why,  man, there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!"    "Stop, Basil!  I won't hear it!" cried Dorian, leaping to his feet.
"You must not tell me about things.
What is done is done.
What is  past is past."    "You call yesterday the past?"    "What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it?
It is only  shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion.
A man who  is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a  pleasure.
I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions.
I want to  use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them."    "Dorian, this is horrible!  Something has changed you completely.
You  look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come  down to my studio to sit for his picture.
But you were simple,  natural, and affectionate then.
You were the most unspoiled creature  in the whole world.
Now, I don't know what has come over you.
You  talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you.
It is all Harry's  influence.
I see that."    The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few  moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden.
"I owe a great  deal to Harry, Basil," he said at last, "more than I owe to you.
You  only taught me to be vain."    "Well, I am punished for that, Dorian--or shall be some day."    "I don't know what you mean, Basil," he exclaimed, turning round.
"I  don't know what you want.
What do you want?"    "I want the Dorian Gray I used to paint," said the artist sadly.
"Basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his  shoulder, "you have come too late.
Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl  Vane had killed herself--"    "Killed herself!  Good heavens! is there no doubt about that?" cried  Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.
"My dear Basil!  Surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident?
Of  course she killed herself."    The elder man buried his face in his hands.
"How fearful," he  muttered, and a shudder ran through him.
"No," said Dorian Gray, "there is nothing fearful about it.
It is one  of the great romantic tragedies of the age.
As a rule, people who act  lead the most commonplace lives.
They are good husbands, or faithful  wives, or something tedious.
You know what I mean--middle-class virtue  and all that kind of thing.
How different Sibyl was!  She lived her  finest tragedy.
She was always a heroine.
The last night she  played--the night you saw her--she acted badly because she had known  the reality of love.
When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet  might have died.
She passed again into the sphere of art.
There is  something of the martyr about her.
Her death has all the pathetic  uselessness of martyrdom, all its wasted beauty.
But, as I was saying,  you must not think I have not suffered.
If you had come in yesterday  at a particular moment--about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to  six--you would have found me in tears.
Even Harry, who was here, who  brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through.
I  suffered immensely.
Then it passed away.
I cannot repeat an emotion.
No one can, except sentimentalists.
And you are awfully unjust, Basil.
You come down here to console me.
That is charming of you.
You find  me consoled, and you are furious.
How like a sympathetic person!  You  remind me of a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who  spent twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance  redressed, or some unjust law altered--I forget exactly what it was.
Finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment.
He  had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of _ennui_, and became a  confirmed misanthrope.
And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really  want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to  see it from a proper artistic point of view.
Was it not Gautier who  used to write about _la consolation des arts_?
I remember picking up a  little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that  delightful phrase.
Well, I am not like that young man you told me of  when we were down at Marlow together, the young man who used to say  that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life.
I  love beautiful things that one can touch and handle.
Old brocades,  green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings,  luxury, pomp--there is much to be got from all these.
But the artistic  temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to  me.
To become the spectator of one's own life, as Harry says, is to  escape the suffering of life.
I know you are surprised at my talking  to you like this.
You have not realized how I have developed.
I was a  schoolboy when you knew me.
I am a man now.
I have new passions, new  thoughts, new ideas.
I am different, but you must not like me less.
I  am changed, but you must always be my friend.
Of course, I am very  fond of Harry.
But I know that you are better than he is.
You are not  stronger--you are too much afraid of life--but you are better.
And how  happy we used to be together!  Don't leave me, Basil, and don't quarrel  with me.
I am what I am.
There is nothing more to be said."    The painter felt strangely moved.
The lad was infinitely dear to him,  and his personality had been the great turning point in his art.
He  could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more.
After all, his  indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away.
There  was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.
"Well, Dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "I won't speak to  you again about this horrible thing, after to-day.
I only trust your  name won't be mentioned in connection with it.
The inquest is to take  place this afternoon.
Have they summoned you?"    Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at  the mention of the word "inquest."  There was something so crude and  vulgar about everything of the kind.
"They don't know my name," he  answered.
"But surely she did?"    "Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned  to any one.
She told me once that they were all rather curious to  learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince  Charming.
It was pretty of her.
You must do me a drawing of Sibyl,  Basil.
I should like to have something more of her than the memory of  a few kisses and some broken pathetic words."    "I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you.
But you  must come and sit to me yourself again.
I can't get on without you."    "I can never sit to you again, Basil.
It is impossible!" he exclaimed,  starting back.
The painter stared at him.
"My dear boy, what nonsense!" he cried.
"Do you mean to say you don't like what I did of you?
Where is it?
Why have you pulled the screen in front of it?
Let me look at it.
It  is the best thing I have ever done.
Do take the screen away, Dorian.
It is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that.
I  felt the room looked different as I came in."    "My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil.
You don't imagine I let  him arrange my room for me?
He settles my flowers for me  sometimes--that is all.
No; I did it myself.
The light was too strong  on the portrait."    "Too strong!  Surely not, my dear fellow?
It is an admirable place for  it.
Let me see it."  And Hallward walked towards the corner of the  room.
A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray's lips, and he rushed between  the painter and the screen.
"Basil," he said, looking very pale, "you  must not look at it.
I don't wish you to."    "Not look at my own work!  You are not serious.
Why shouldn't I look  at it?" exclaimed Hallward, laughing.
"If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never  speak to you again as long as I live.
I am quite serious.
I don't  offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any.
But, remember,  if you touch this screen, everything is over between us."    Hallward was thunderstruck.
He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute  amazement.
He had never seen him like this before.
The lad was  actually pallid with rage.
His hands were clenched, and the pupils of  his eyes were like disks of blue fire.
He was trembling all over.
"Dorian!"    "Don't speak!"    "But what is the matter?
Of course I won't look at it if you don't  want me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over  towards the window.
"But, really, it seems rather absurd that I  shouldn't see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in  Paris in the autumn.
I shall probably have to give it another coat of  varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"    "To exhibit it!  You want to exhibit it?" exclaimed Dorian Gray, a  strange sense of terror creeping over him.
Was the world going to be  shown his secret?
Were people to gape at the mystery of his life?
That was impossible.
Something--he did not know what--had to be done  at once.
"Yes; I don't suppose you will object to that.
Georges Petit is going  to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de  Seze, which will open the first week in October.
The portrait will  only be away a month.
I should think you could easily spare it for  that time.
In fact, you are sure to be out of town.
And if you keep  it always behind a screen, you can't care much about it."    Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead.
There were beads of  perspiration there.
He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible  danger.
"You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he  cried.
"Why have you changed your mind?
You people who go in for  being consistent have just as many moods as others have.
The only  difference is that your moods are rather meaningless.
You can't have  forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world  would induce you to send it to any exhibition.
You told Harry exactly  the same thing." He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into  his eyes.
He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half  seriously and half in jest, "If you want to have a strange quarter of  an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won't exhibit your picture.
He  told me why he wouldn't, and it was a revelation to me."  Yes, perhaps  Basil, too, had his secret.
He would ask him and try.
"Basil," he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in  the face, "we have each of us a secret.
Let me know yours, and I shall  tell you mine.
What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my  picture?"    The painter shuddered in spite of himself.
"Dorian, if I told you, you  might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me.
I  could not bear your doing either of those two things.
If you wish me  never to look at your picture again, I am content.
I have always you  to look at.
If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden  from the world, I am satisfied.
Your friendship is dearer to me than  any fame or reputation."    "No, Basil, you must tell me," insisted Dorian Gray.
"I think I have a  right to know."  His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity  had taken its place.
He was determined to find out Basil Hallward's  mystery.
"Let us sit down, Dorian," said the painter, looking troubled.
"Let us  sit down.
And just answer me one question.
Have you noticed in the  picture something curious?--something that probably at first did not  strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"    "Basil!" cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling  hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.
"I see you did.
Don't speak.
Wait till you hear what I have to say.
Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most  extraordinary influence over me.
I was dominated, soul, brain, and  power, by you.
You became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen  ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream.
I  worshipped you.
I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke.
I  wanted to have you all to myself.
I was only happy when I was with  you.
When you were away from me, you were still present in my art....
Of course, I never let you know anything about this.
It would have  been impossible.
You would not have understood it.
I hardly  understood it myself.
I only knew that I had seen perfection face to  face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes--too  wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the peril  of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them....
Weeks and  weeks went on, and I grew more and more absorbed in you.
Then came a  new development.
I had drawn you as Paris in dainty armour, and as  Adonis with huntsman's cloak and polished boar-spear.
Crowned with  heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow of Adrian's barge, gazing  across the green turbid Nile.
You had leaned over the still pool of  some Greek woodland and seen in the water's silent silver the marvel of  your own face.
And it had all been what art should be--unconscious,  ideal, and remote.
One day, a fatal day I sometimes think, I  determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are,  not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own  time.
Whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of  your own personality, thus directly presented to me without mist or  veil, I cannot tell.
But I know that as I worked at it, every flake  and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret.
I grew afraid  that others would know of my idolatry.
I felt, Dorian, that I had told  too much, that I had put too much of myself into it.
Then it was that  I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited.
You were a  little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant to me.
Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me.
But I did not mind  that.
When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt  that I was right....
Well, after a few days the thing left my studio,  and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its  presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that I  had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking  and that I could paint.
Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a  mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever really  shown in the work one creates.
Art is always more abstract than we  fancy.
Form and colour tell us of form and colour--that is all.
It  often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely than  it ever reveals him.
And so when I got this offer from Paris, I  determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.
It never occurred to me that you would refuse.
I see now that you were  right.
The picture cannot be shown.
You must not be angry with me,  Dorian, for what I have told you.
As I said to Harry, once, you are  made to be worshipped."    Dorian Gray drew a long breath.
The colour came back to his cheeks,  and a smile played about his lips.
The peril was over.
He was safe  for the time.
Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the  painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered  if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a  friend.
Lord Henry had the charm of being very dangerous.
But that  was all.
He was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of.
Would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange  idolatry?
Was that one of the things that life had in store?
"It is extraordinary to me, Dorian," said Hallward, "that you should  have seen this in the portrait.
Did you really see it?"    "I saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed to me very  curious."    "Well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"    Dorian shook his head.
"You must not ask me that, Basil.
I could not  possibly let you stand in front of that picture."    "You will some day, surely?"    "Never."    "Well, perhaps you are right.
And now good-bye, Dorian.
You have been  the one person in my life who has really influenced my art.
Whatever I  have done that is good, I owe to you.
Ah! you don't know what it cost  me to tell you all that I have told you."    "My dear Basil," said Dorian, "what have you told me?
Simply that you  felt that you admired me too much.
That is not even a compliment."    "It was not intended as a compliment.
It was a confession.
Now that I  have made it, something seems to have gone out of me.
Perhaps one  should never put one's worship into words."    "It was a very disappointing confession."    "Why, what did you expect, Dorian?
You didn't see anything else in the  picture, did you?
There was nothing else to see?"    "No; there was nothing else to see.
Why do you ask?
But you mustn't  talk about worship.
It is foolish.
You and I are friends, Basil, and  we must always remain so."    "You have got Harry," said the painter sadly.
"Oh, Harry!" cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter.
"Harry spends  his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is  improbable.
Just the sort of life I would like to lead.
But still I  don't think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble.
I would sooner  go to you, Basil."    "You will sit to me again?"    "Impossible!"    "You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian.
No man comes  across two ideal things.
Few come across one."    "I can't explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again.
There is something fatal about a portrait.
It has a life of its own.
I will come and have tea with you.
That will be just as pleasant."    "Pleasanter for you, I am afraid," murmured Hallward regretfully.
"And  now good-bye.
I am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once  again.
But that can't be helped.
I quite understand what you feel  about it."    As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself.
Poor Basil!  How  little he knew of the true reason!  And how strange it was that,  instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had  succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend!  How  much that strange confession explained to him!  The painter's absurd  fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his  curious reticences--he understood them all now, and he felt sorry.
There seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured  by romance.
He sighed and touched the bell.
The portrait must be hidden away at  all costs.
He could not run such a risk of discovery again.
It had  been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour,  in a room to which any of his friends had access.
When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if  he had thought of peering behind the screen.
The man was quite  impassive and waited for his orders.
Dorian lit a cigarette and walked  over to the glass and glanced into it.
He could see the reflection of  Victor's face perfectly.
It was like a placid mask of servility.
There was nothing to be afraid of, there.
Yet he thought it best to be  on his guard.
Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he  wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to  send two of his men round at once.
It seemed to him that as the man  left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen.
Or was  that merely his own fancy?
After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread  mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs.
Leaf bustled into the library.
He  asked her for the key of the schoolroom.
"The old schoolroom, Mr. Dorian?" she exclaimed.
"Why, it is full of  dust.
I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it.
It is not fit for you to see, sir.
It is not, indeed."    "I don't want it put straight, Leaf.
I only want the key."    "Well, sir, you'll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it.
Why, it  hasn't been opened for nearly five years--not since his lordship died."    He winced at the mention of his grandfather.
He had hateful memories  of him.
"That does not matter," he answered.
"I simply want to see  the place--that is all.
Give me the key."    "And here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over the contents  of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands.
"Here is the key.
I'll  have it off the bunch in a moment.
But you don't think of living up  there, sir, and you so comfortable here?"    "No, no," he cried petulantly.
"Thank you, Leaf.
That will do."    She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of  the household.
He sighed and told her to manage things as she thought  best.
She left the room, wreathed in smiles.
As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round  the room.
His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily  embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century  Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna.
Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in.
It had perhaps  served often as a pall for the dead.
Now it was to hide something that  had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death  itself--something that would breed horrors and yet would never die.
What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image  on the canvas.
They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace.
They  would defile it and make it shameful.
And yet the thing would still  live on.
It would be always alive.
He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil  the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away.
Basil  would have helped him to resist Lord Henry's influence, and the still  more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament.
The love  that he bore him--for it was really love--had nothing in it that was  not noble and intellectual.
It was not that mere physical admiration  of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses  tire.
It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and  Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself.
Yes, Basil could have saved him.
But it was too late now.
The past could always be annihilated.
Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that.
But the future was  inevitable.
There were passions in him that would find their terrible  outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.
He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that  covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen.
Was the face on the canvas viler than before?
It seemed to him that it  was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified.
Gold hair,  blue eyes, and rose-red lips--they all were there.
It was simply the  expression that had altered.
That was horrible in its cruelty.
Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil's  reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!--how shallow, and of what little  account!  His own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and  calling him to judgement.
A look of pain came across him, and he flung  the rich pall over the picture.
As he did so, a knock came to the  door.
He passed out as his servant entered.
"The persons are here, Monsieur."    He felt that the man must be got rid of at once.
He must not be  allowed to know where the picture was being taken to.
There was  something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes.
Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry,  asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that  they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.
"Wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in  here."    In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard  himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in  with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant.
Mr. Hubbard was a  florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was  considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the  artists who dealt with him.
As a rule, he never left his shop.
He  waited for people to come to him.
But he always made an exception in  favour of Dorian Gray.
There was something about Dorian that charmed  everybody.
It was a pleasure even to see him.
"What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?" he said, rubbing his fat freckled  hands.
"I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in  person.
I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir.
Picked it up at a  sale.
Old Florentine.
Came from Fonthill, I believe.
Admirably  suited for a religious subject, Mr. Gray."    "I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr.  Hubbard.
I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame--though I  don't go in much at present for religious art--but to-day I only want a  picture carried to the top of the house for me.
It is rather heavy, so  I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men."    "No trouble at all, Mr. Gray.
I am delighted to be of any service to  you.
Which is the work of art, sir?"    "This," replied Dorian, moving the screen back.
"Can you move it,  covering and all, just as it is?
I don't want it to get scratched  going upstairs."    "There will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker,  beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from  the long brass chains by which it was suspended.
"And, now, where  shall we carry it to, Mr. Gray?"    "I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me.
Or perhaps you had better go in front.
I am afraid it is right at the  top of the house.
We will go up by the front staircase, as it is  wider."    He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and  began the ascent.
The elaborate character of the frame had made the  picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious  protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman's spirited dislike  of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it  so as to help them.
"Something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they  reached the top landing.
And he wiped his shiny forehead.
"I am afraid it is rather heavy," murmured Dorian as he unlocked the  door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious  secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.
He had not entered the place for more than four years--not, indeed,  since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then  as a study when he grew somewhat older.
It was a large,  well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord  Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness  to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and  desired to keep at a distance.
It appeared to Dorian to have but  little changed.
There was the huge Italian _cassone_, with its  fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which  he had so often hidden himself as a boy.
There the satinwood book-case  filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks.
On the wall behind it was  hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen  were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by,  carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists.
How well he  remembered it all!  Every moment of his lonely childhood came back to  him as he looked round.
He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish  life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait  was to be hidden away.
How little he had thought, in those dead days,  of all that was in store for him!    But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as  this.
He had the key, and no one else could enter it.
Beneath its  purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden,  and unclean.
What did it matter?
No one could see it.
He himself  would not see it.
Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his  soul?
He kept his youth--that was enough.
And, besides, might not  his nature grow finer, after all?
There was no reason that the future  should be so full of shame.
Some love might come across his life, and  purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already  stirring in spirit and in flesh--those curious unpictured sins whose  very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm.
Perhaps, some  day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive  mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward's masterpiece.
No; that was impossible.
Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing  upon the canvas was growing old.
It might escape the hideousness of  sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it.
The cheeks would  become hollow or flaccid.
Yellow crow's feet would creep round the  fading eyes and make them horrible.
The hair would lose its  brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross,  as the mouths of old men are.
There would be the wrinkled throat, the  cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the  grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood.
The picture  had to be concealed.
There was no help for it.
"Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard, please," he said, wearily, turning round.
"I am sorry I kept you so long.
I was thinking of something else."    "Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Gray," answered the frame-maker, who  was still gasping for breath.
"Where shall we put it, sir?"    "Oh, anywhere.
Here:  this will do.
I don't want to have it hung up.
Just lean it against the wall.
Thanks."    "Might one look at the work of art, sir?"    Dorian started.
"It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard," he said,  keeping his eye on the man.
He felt ready to leap upon him and fling  him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that  concealed the secret of his life.
"I shan't trouble you any more now.
I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round."    "Not at all, not at all, Mr. Gray.
Ever ready to do anything for you,  sir." And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant,  who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough  uncomely face.
He had never seen any one so marvellous.
When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door  and put the key in his pocket.
He felt safe now.
No one would ever  look upon the horrible thing.
No eye but his would ever see his shame.
On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o'clock  and that the tea had been already brought up.
On a little table of  dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady  Radley, his guardian's wife, a pretty professional invalid who had  spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from Lord Henry,  and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn  and the edges soiled.
A copy of the third edition of _The St. James's  Gazette_ had been placed on the tea-tray.
It was evident that Victor had  returned.
He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were  leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.
He would be sure to miss the picture--had no doubt missed it already,  while he had been laying the tea-things.
The screen had not been set  back, and a blank space was visible on the wall.
Perhaps some night he  might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the  room.
It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one's house.
He had  heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some  servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked  up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower  or a shred of crumpled lace.
He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry's  note.
It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper,  and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at  eight-fifteen.
He opened _The St. James's_ languidly, and looked through  it.
A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye.
It drew  attention to the following paragraph:      INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.--An inquest was held this morning at the Bell  Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of  Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre,  Holborn.
A verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who  was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of  Dr. Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.
He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and  flung the pieces away.
How ugly it all was!  And how horribly real  ugliness made things!  He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for  having sent him the report.
And it was certainly stupid of him to have  marked it with red pencil.
Victor might have read it.
The man knew  more than enough English for that.
Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something.
And, yet,  what did it matter?
What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane's  death?
There was nothing to fear.
Dorian Gray had not killed her.
His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him.
What was  it, he wondered.
He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal  stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange  Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung  himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves.
After a  few minutes he became absorbed.
It was the strangest book that he had  ever read.
It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the  delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb  show before him.
Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly  made real to him.
Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually  revealed.
It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being,  indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who  spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the  passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his  own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through  which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere  artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue,  as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin.
The  style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid  and obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technical  expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work  of some of the finest artists of the French school of _Symbolistes_.
There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in  colour.
The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical  philosophy.
One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the  spiritual ecstasies of some mediaeval saint or the morbid confessions  of a modern sinner.
It was a poisonous book.
The heavy odour of  incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain.
The  mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so  full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated,  produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from to chapter,  a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of  the falling day and creeping shadows.
Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed  through the windows.
He read on by its wan light till he could read no  more.
Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the  lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed  the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his  bedside and began to dress for dinner.
It was almost nine o'clock before he reached the club, where he found  Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.
"I am so sorry, Harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely your  fault.
That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the  time was going."    "Yes, I thought you would like it," replied his host, rising from his  chair.
"I didn't say I liked it, Harry.
I said it fascinated me.
There is a  great difference."    "Ah, you have discovered that?" murmured Lord Henry.
And they passed  into the dining-room.
For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of  this book.
Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never  sought to free himself from it.
He procured from Paris no less than  nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in  different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the  changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have  almost entirely lost control.
The hero, the wonderful young Parisian  in whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely  blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.
And,  indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own  life, written before he had lived it.
In one point he was more fortunate than the novel's fantastic hero.
He  never knew--never, indeed, had any cause to know--that somewhat  grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still  water which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was  occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently,  been so remarkable.
It was with an almost cruel joy--and perhaps in  nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its  place--that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its  really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and  despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he  had most dearly valued.
For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and  many others besides him, seemed never to leave him.
Even those who had  heard the most evil things against him--and from time to time strange  rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the  chatter of the clubs--could not believe anything to his dishonour when  they saw him.
He had always the look of one who had kept himself  unspotted from the world.
Men who talked grossly became silent when  Dorian Gray entered the room.
There was something in the purity of his  face that rebuked them.
His mere presence seemed to recall to them the  memory of the innocence that they had tarnished.
They wondered how one  so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an  age that was at once sordid and sensual.
Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged  absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were  his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep  upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left  him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil  Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on  the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him  from the polished glass.
The very sharpness of the contrast used to  quicken his sense of pleasure.
He grew more and more enamoured of his  own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and  terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead  or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which  were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age.
He would  place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture,  and smile.
He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.
There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own  delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little  ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in  disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he  had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant  because it was purely selfish.
But moments such as these were rare.
That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as  they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase  with gratification.
The more he knew, the more he desired to know.
He  had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.
Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to  society.
Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each  Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the  world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the  day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art.
His little  dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were  noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited,  as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with  its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered  cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver.
Indeed, there were many,  especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw,  in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often  dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of  the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and  perfect manner of a citizen of the world.
To them he seemed to be of  the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to "make  themselves perfect by the worship of beauty."  Like Gautier, he was one  for whom "the visible world existed."    And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the  arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.
Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment  universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert  the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for  him.
His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to  time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of  the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in  everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of  his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.
For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost  immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a  subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the  London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the  Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be  something more than a mere _arbiter elegantiarum_, to be consulted on the  wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a  cane.
He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have  its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the  spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.
The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been  decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and  sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are  conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.
But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had  never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal  merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or  to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a  new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the  dominant characteristic.
As he looked back upon man moving through  history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss.
So much had been  surrendered! and to such little purpose!  There had been mad wilful  rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose  origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more  terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance,  they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out  the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to  the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.
Yes:  there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism  that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely  puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival.
It was  to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to  accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any  mode of passionate experience.
Its aim, indeed, was to be experience  itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might  be.
Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar  profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing.
But it was to  teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is  itself but a moment.
There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either  after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of  death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through  the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality  itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques,  and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one  might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled  with the malady of reverie.
Gradually white fingers creep through the  curtains, and they appear to tremble.
In black fantastic shapes, dumb  shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there.
Outside,  there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men  going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down  from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it  feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from  her purple cave.
Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by  degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we  watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern.
The wan  mirrors get back their mimic life.
The flameless tapers stand where we  had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been  studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the  letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.
Nothing seems to us changed.
Out of the unreal shadows of the night  comes back the real life that we had known.
We have to resume it where  we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the  necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of  stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids  might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in  the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh  shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in  which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate,  in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of  joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.
It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray  to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his  search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and  possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he  would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really  alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and  then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his  intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that  is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that,  indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition  of it.
It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman  Catholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great  attraction for him.
The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all  the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb  rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity  of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it  sought to symbolize.
He loved to kneel down on the cold marble  pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly  and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or  raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid  wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the "_panis  caelestis_," the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the  Passion of Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his  breast for his sins.
The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their  lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their  subtle fascination for him.
As he passed out, he used to look with  wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of  one of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn  grating the true story of their lives.
But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual  development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of  mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable  for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which  there are no stars and the moon is in travail.
Mysticism, with its  marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle  antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a  season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of  the _Darwinismus_ movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in  tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the  brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of  the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions,  morbid or healthy, normal or diseased.
Yet, as has been said of him  before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance  compared with life itself.
He felt keenly conscious of how barren all  intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.
He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual  mysteries to reveal.
And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their  manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums  from the East.
He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not  its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their  true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one  mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one's passions, and in violets  that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the  brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often  to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several  influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers;  of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that  sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to  be able to expel melancholy from the soul.
At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long  latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of  olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad  gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled  Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while  grinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching  upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes of  reed or brass and charmed--or feigned to charm--great hooded snakes and  horrible horned adders.
The harsh intervals and shrill discords of  barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert's grace, and Chopin's  beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell  unheeded on his ear.
He collected together from all parts of the world  the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of  dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact  with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them.
He had  the mysterious _juruparis_ of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not  allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been  subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the  Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human  bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and the sonorous green  jaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular  sweetness.
He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when  they were shaken; the long _clarin_ of the Mexicans, into which the  performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the  harsh _ture_ of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who  sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a  distance of three leagues; the _teponaztli_, that has two vibrating  tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an  elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the _yotl_-bells of  the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge  cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the  one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexican  temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a  description.
The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated  him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like  Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous  voices.
Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his  box at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in rapt  pleasure to "Tannhauser" and seeing in the prelude to that great work  of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.
On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a  costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered  with five hundred and sixty pearls.
This taste enthralled him for  years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him.
He would often  spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various  stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that  turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver,  the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes,  carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red  cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their  alternate layers of ruby and sapphire.
He loved the red gold of the  sunstone, and the moonstone's pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow  of the milky opal.
He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of  extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise _de la  vieille roche_ that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.
He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels.
In Alphonso's  Clericalis Disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real  jacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander, the Conqueror of  Emathia was said to have found in the vale of Jordan snakes "with  collars of real emeralds growing on their backs." There was a gem in  the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition  of golden letters and a scarlet robe" the monster could be thrown into  a magical sleep and slain.
According to the great alchemist, Pierre de  Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India  made him eloquent.
The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth  provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine.
The  garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her  colour.
The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus,  that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a  newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison.
The  bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm  that could cure the plague.
In the nests of Arabian birds was the  aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any  danger by fire.
The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand,  as the ceremony of his coronation.
The gates of the palace of John the  Priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake  inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within." Over the gable  were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the  gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night.
In Lodge's  strange romance 'A Margarite of America', it was stated that in the  chamber of the queen one could behold "all the chaste ladies of the  world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of  chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults." Marco Polo  had seen the inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the  mouths of the dead.
A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that  the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned  for seven moons over its loss.
When the Huns lured the king into the  great pit, he flung it away--Procopius tells the story--nor was it ever  found again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight  of gold pieces for it.
The King of Malabar had shown to a certain  Venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god  that he worshipped.
When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI, visited Louis XII of  France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to Brantome,  and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great light.
Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and  twenty-one diamonds.
Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty thousand  marks, which was covered with balas rubies.
Hall described Henry VIII,  on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as wearing "a  jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other  rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses."  The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold  filigrane.
Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold armour  studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with  turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parseme_ with pearls.
Henry II wore  jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with  twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients.
The ducal hat of Charles  the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with  pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.
How exquisite life had once been!  How gorgeous in its pomp and  decoration!  Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.
Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that  performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern  nations of Europe.
As he investigated the subject--and he always had  an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment  in whatever he took up--he was almost saddened by the reflection of the  ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things.
He, at any  rate, had escaped that.
Summer followed summer, and the yellow  jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the  story of their shame, but he was unchanged.
No winter marred his face  or stained his flowerlike bloom.
How different it was with material  things!  Where had they passed to?
Where was the great crocus-coloured  robe, on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked  by brown girls for the pleasure of Athena?
Where the huge velarium  that Nero had stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail  of purple on which was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a  chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds?
He longed to see the  curious table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which were  displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast;  the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden  bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of  Pontus and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests,  rocks, hunters--all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature"; and  the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which  were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "_Madame, je suis tout  joyeux_," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold  thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four  pearls.
He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims  for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen  hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the  king's arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings  were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked  in gold."  Catherine de Medicis had a mourning-bed made for her of  black velvet powdered with crescents and suns.
Its curtains were of  damask, with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver  ground, and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it  stood in a room hung with rows of the queen's devices in cut black  velvet upon cloth of silver.
Louis XIV had gold embroidered caryatides  fifteen feet high in his apartment.
The state bed of Sobieski, King of  Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with  verses from the Koran.
Its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully  chased, and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions.
It  had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of  Mohammed had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.
And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite  specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting  the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and  stitched over with iridescent beetles' wings; the Dacca gauzes, that  from their transparency are known in the East as "woven air," and  "running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from Java;  elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair  blue silks and wrought with _fleurs-de-lis_, birds and images; veils of  _lacis_ worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish  velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese _Foukousas_,  with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.
He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed  he had for everything connected with the service of the Church.
In the  long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had  stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the  raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and  fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by  the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain.
He possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask,  figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in  six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the  pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls.
The orphreys were divided  into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the  coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood.
This was Italian work of the fifteenth century.
Another cope was of  green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves,  from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which  were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals.
The morse  bore a seraph's head in gold-thread raised work.
The orphreys were  woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with  medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian.
He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold  brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with  representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and  embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of  white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins  and _fleurs-de-lis_; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and  many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria.
In the mystic offices to  which such things were put, there was something that quickened his  imagination.
For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely  house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he  could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times  to be almost too great to be borne.
Upon the walls of the lonely  locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with  his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him  the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the  purple-and-gold pall as a curtain.
For weeks he would not go there,  would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart,  his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence.
Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to  dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day,  until he was driven away.
On his return he would sit in front of the  picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other  times, with that pride of individualism that is half the  fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen  shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.
After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and  gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as  well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more  than once spent the winter.
He hated to be separated from the picture  that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his  absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the  elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.
He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing.
It was true  that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness  of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn  from that?
He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him.
He had  not painted it.
What was it to him how vile and full of shame it  looked?
Even if he told them, would they believe it?
Yet he was afraid.
Sometimes when he was down at his great house in  Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank  who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton  luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly  leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not  been tampered with and that the picture was still there.
What if it  should be stolen?
The mere thought made him cold with horror.
Surely  the world would know his secret then.
Perhaps the world already  suspected it.
For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him.
He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth  and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was  said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the  smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another  gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out.
Curious stories  became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year.
It  was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a  low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with  thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade.
His  extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear  again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass  him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though  they were determined to discover his secret.
Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice,  and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his  charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth  that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer  to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about  him.
It was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most  intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him.
Women who had  wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and  set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or  horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.
Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his  strange and dangerous charm.
His great wealth was a certain element of  security.
Society--civilized society, at least--is never very ready to  believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and  fascinating.
It feels instinctively that manners are of more  importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability  is of much less value than the possession of a good _chef_.
And, after  all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has  given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private  life.
Even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold _entrees_, as  Lord Henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is  possibly a good deal to be said for his view.
For the canons of good  society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art.
Form is  absolutely essential to it.
It should have the dignity of a ceremony,  as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of  a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful  to us.
Is insincerity such a terrible thing?
I think not.
It is  merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.
Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray's opinion.
He used to wonder at the  shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing  simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence.
To him, man was a  being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform  creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and  passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies  of the dead.
He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery  of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose  blood flowed in his veins.
Here was Philip Herbert, described by  Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and  King James, as one who was "caressed by the Court for his handsome  face, which kept him not long company."  Was it young Herbert's life  that he sometimes led?
Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body  to body till it had reached his own?
Was it some dim sense of that  ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause,  give utterance, in Basil Hallward's studio, to the mad prayer that had  so changed his life?
Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled  surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood Sir Anthony Sherard,  with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet.
What had this  man's legacy been?
Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him  some inheritance of sin and shame?
Were his own actions merely the  dreams that the dead man had not dared to realize?
Here, from the  fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl  stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.
A flower was in her right hand,  and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses.
On  a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple.
There were large  green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes.
He knew her life, and  the strange stories that were told about her lovers.
Had he something  of her temperament in him?
These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to  look curiously at him.
What of George Willoughby, with his powdered  hair and fantastic patches?
How evil he looked!  The face was  saturnine and swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with  disdain.
Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that  were so overladen with rings.
He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth  century, and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars.
What of the  second Lord Beckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his  wildest days, and one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs.
Fitzherbert?
How proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls  and insolent pose!  What passions had he bequeathed?
The world had  looked upon him as infamous.
He had led the orgies at Carlton House.
The star of the Garter glittered upon his breast.
Beside him hung the  portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black.
Her blood,  also, stirred within him.
How curious it all seemed!  And his mother  with her Lady Hamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips--he knew  what he had got from her.
He had got from her his beauty, and his  passion for the beauty of others.
She laughed at him in her loose  Bacchante dress.
There were vine leaves in her hair.
The purple  spilled from the cup she was holding.
The carnations of the painting  had withered, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and  brilliancy of colour.
They seemed to follow him wherever he went.
Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one's own race,  nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly  with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious.
There  were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history  was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act  and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it  had been in his brain and in his passions.
He felt that he had known  them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the  stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of  subtlety.
It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had  been his own.
The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had  himself known this curious fancy.
In the seventh he tells how,  crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as  Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of  Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the  flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had  caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in  an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had  wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round  with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his  days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible _taedium vitae_, that comes  on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear  emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of  pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the  Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero  Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with  colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon  from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.
Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the  two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious  tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and  beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made  monstrous or mad:  Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and  painted her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death  from the dead thing he fondled; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as  Paul the Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of  Formosus, and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was  bought at the price of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used  hounds to chase living men and whose murdered body was covered with  roses by a harlot who had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse,  with Fratricide riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood  of Perotto; Pietro Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence,  child and minion of Sixtus IV, whose beauty was equalled only by his  debauchery, and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white  and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy  that he might serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose  melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a  passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine--the son of the  Fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when  gambling with him for his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery  took the name of Innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of  three lads was infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the  lover of Isotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome  as the enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and  gave poison to Ginevra d'Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a  shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles  VI, who had so wildly adored his brother's wife that a leper had warned  him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his brain had  sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by Saracen cards  painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in his  trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, Grifonetto  Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and Simonetto with his page,  and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow  piazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep,  and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.
There was a horrible fascination in them all.
He saw them at night,  and they troubled his imagination in the day.
The Renaissance knew of  strange manners of poisoning--poisoning by a helmet and a lighted  torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander  and by an amber chain.
Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book.
There  were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he  could realize his conception of the beautiful.
It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth  birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.
He was walking home about eleven o'clock from Lord Henry's, where he  had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold  and foggy.
At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street,  a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of  his grey ulster turned up.
He had a bag in his hand.
Dorian  recognized him.
It was Basil Hallward.
A strange sense of fear, for  which he could not account, came over him.
He made no sign of  recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.
But Hallward had seen him.
Dorian heard him first stopping on the  pavement and then hurrying after him.
In a few moments, his hand was  on his arm.
"Dorian!  What an extraordinary piece of luck!  I have been waiting for  you in your library ever since nine o'clock.
Finally I took pity on  your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out.
I am  off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see  you before I left.
I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as  you passed me.
But I wasn't quite sure.
Didn't you recognize me?"    "In this fog, my dear Basil?
Why, I can't even recognize Grosvenor  Square.
I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don't feel  at all certain about it.
I am sorry you are going away, as I have not  seen you for ages.
But I suppose you will be back soon?"    "No:  I am going to be out of England for six months.
I intend to take  a studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great  picture I have in my head.
However, it wasn't about myself I wanted to  talk.
Here we are at your door.
Let me come in for a moment.
I have  something to say to you."    "I shall be charmed.
But won't you miss your train?" said Dorian Gray  languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his  latch-key.
The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his  watch.
"I have heaps of time," he answered.
"The train doesn't go  till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven.
In fact, I was on my  way to the club to look for you, when I met you.
You see, I shan't  have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things.
All I  have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty  minutes."    Dorian looked at him and smiled.
"What a way for a fashionable painter  to travel!  A Gladstone bag and an ulster!  Come in, or the fog will  get into the house.
And mind you don't talk about anything serious.
Nothing is serious nowadays.
At least nothing should be."    Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the  library.
There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open  hearth.
The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case  stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on  a little marqueterie table.
"You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian.
He gave me  everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes.
He is  a most hospitable creature.
I like him much better than the Frenchman  you used to have.
What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?"    Dorian shrugged his shoulders.
"I believe he married Lady Radley's  maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker.
Anglomania is very fashionable over there now, I hear.
It seems silly  of the French, doesn't it?
But--do you know?--he was not at all a bad  servant.
I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about.
One  often imagines things that are quite absurd.
He was really very  devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away.
Have another  brandy-and-soda?
Or would you like hock-and-seltzer?
I always take  hock-and-seltzer myself.
There is sure to be some in the next room."    "Thanks, I won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap  and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the  corner.
"And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously.
Don't frown like that.
You make it so much more difficult for me."    "What is it all about?" cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging  himself down on the sofa.
"I hope it is not about myself.
I am tired  of myself to-night.
I should like to be somebody else."    "It is about yourself," answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, "and  I must say it to you.
I shall only keep you half an hour."    Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette.
"Half an hour!" he murmured.
"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own  sake that I am speaking.
I think it right that you should know that  the most dreadful things are being said against you in London."    "I don't wish to know anything about them.
I love scandals about other  people, but scandals about myself don't interest me.
They have not got  the charm of novelty."    "They must interest you, Dorian.
Every gentleman is interested in his  good name.
You don't want people to talk of you as something vile and  degraded.
Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all  that kind of thing.
But position and wealth are not everything.
Mind  you, I don't believe these rumours at all.
At least, I can't believe  them when I see you.
Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man's  face.
It cannot be concealed.
People talk sometimes of secret vices.
There are no such things.
If a wretched man has a vice, it shows  itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the  moulding of his hands even.
Somebody--I won't mention his name, but  you know him--came to me last year to have his portrait done.
I had  never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the  time, though I have heard a good deal since.
He offered an extravagant  price.
I refused him.
There was something in the shape of his fingers  that I hated.
I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied  about him.
His life is dreadful.
But you, Dorian, with your pure,  bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth--I can't  believe anything against you.
And yet I see you very seldom, and you  never come down to the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I  hear all these hideous things that people are whispering about you, I  don't know what to say.
Why is it, Dorian, that a man like the Duke of  Berwick leaves the room of a club when you enter it?
Why is it that so  many gentlemen in London will neither go to your house or invite you to  theirs?
You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley.
I met him at dinner  last week.
Your name happened to come up in conversation, in  connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the  Dudley.
Staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most  artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl  should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the  same room with.
I reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked  him what he meant.
He told me.
He told me right out before everybody.
It was horrible!  Why is your friendship so fatal to young men?
There  was that wretched boy in the Guards who committed suicide.
You were  his great friend.
There was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England  with a tarnished name.
You and he were inseparable.
What about Adrian  Singleton and his dreadful end?
What about Lord Kent's only son and  his career?
I met his father yesterday in St. James's Street.
He  seemed broken with shame and sorrow.
What about the young Duke of  Perth?
What sort of life has he got now?
What gentleman would  associate with him?"    "Stop, Basil.
You are talking about things of which you know nothing,"  said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt  in his voice.
"You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it.
It is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows  anything about mine.
With such blood as he has in his veins, how could  his record be clean?
You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth.
Did I teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery?
If Kent's  silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me?
If  Adrian Singleton writes his friend's name across a bill, am I his  keeper?
I know how people chatter in England.
The middle classes air  their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper  about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try  and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with  the people they slander.
In this country, it is enough for a man to  have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.
And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead  themselves?
My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land  of the hypocrite."    "Dorian," cried Hallward, "that is not the question.
England is bad  enough I know, and English society is all wrong.
That is the reason  why I want you to be fine.
You have not been fine.
One has a right to  judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends.
Yours seem to  lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity.
You have filled them  with a madness for pleasure.
They have gone down into the depths.
You  led them there.
Yes:  you led them there, and yet you can smile, as  you are smiling now.
And there is worse behind.
I know you and Harry  are inseparable.
Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should  not have made his sister's name a by-word."    "Take care, Basil.
You go too far."    "I must speak, and you must listen.
You shall listen.
When you met  Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her.
Is there  a single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the  park?
Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her.
Then  there are other stories--stories that you have been seen creeping at  dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest  dens in London.
Are they true?
Can they be true?
When I first heard  them, I laughed.
I hear them now, and they make me shudder.
What  about your country-house and the life that is led there?
Dorian, you  don't know what is said about you.
I won't tell you that I don't want  to preach to you.
I remember Harry saying once that every man who  turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by  saying that, and then proceeded to break his word.
I do want to preach  to you.
I want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect  you.
I want you to have a clean name and a fair record.
I want you to  get rid of the dreadful people you associate with.
Don't shrug your  shoulders like that.
Don't be so indifferent.
You have a wonderful  influence.
Let it be for good, not for evil.
They say that you  corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite  sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow  after.
I don't know whether it is so or not.
How should I know?
But  it is said of you.
I am told things that it seems impossible to doubt.
Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford.
He showed me  a letter that his wife had written to him when she was dying alone in  her villa at Mentone.
Your name was implicated in the most terrible  confession I ever read.
I told him that it was absurd--that I knew you  thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind.
Know  you?
I wonder do I know you?
Before I could answer that, I should  have to see your soul."    "To see my soul!" muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and  turning almost white from fear.
"Yes," answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his  voice, "to see your soul.
But only God can do that."    A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man.
"You  shall see it yourself, to-night!" he cried, seizing a lamp from the  table.
"Come:  it is your own handiwork.
Why shouldn't you look at  it?
You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose.
Nobody would believe you.
If they did believe you, they would like me  all the better for it.
I know the age better than you do, though you  will prate about it so tediously.
Come, I tell you.
You have  chattered enough about corruption.
Now you shall look on it face to  face."    There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered.
He stamped  his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner.
He felt a  terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret,  and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of  all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the  hideous memory of what he had done.
"Yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into  his stern eyes, "I shall show you my soul.
You shall see the thing  that you fancy only God can see."    Hallward started back.
"This is blasphemy, Dorian!" he cried.
"You  must not say things like that.
They are horrible, and they don't mean  anything."    "You think so?"  He laughed again.
"I know so.
As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your  good.
You know I have been always a stanch friend to you."    "Don't touch me.
Finish what you have to say."    A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter's face.
He paused for  a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him.
After all, what  right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray?
If he had done a  tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered!  Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and  stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and  their throbbing cores of flame.
"I am waiting, Basil," said the young man in a hard clear voice.
He turned round.
"What I have to say is this," he cried.
"You must  give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against  you.
If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to  end, I shall believe you.
Deny them, Dorian, deny them!  Can't you see  what I am going through?
My God! don't tell me that you are bad, and  corrupt, and shameful."    Dorian Gray smiled.
There was a curl of contempt in his lips.
"Come  upstairs, Basil," he said quietly.
"I keep a diary of my life from day  to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written.
I shall  show it to you if you come with me."    "I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it.
I see I have missed my  train.
That makes no matter.
I can go to-morrow.
But don't ask me to  read anything to-night.
All I want is a plain answer to my question."    "That shall be given to you upstairs.
I could not give it here.
You  will not have to read long."            He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward  following close behind.
They walked softly, as men do instinctively at  night.
The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase.
A  rising wind made some of the windows rattle.
When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the  floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock.
"You insist on  knowing, Basil?" he asked in a low voice.
"Yes."    "I am delighted," he answered, smiling.
Then he added, somewhat  harshly, "You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know  everything about me.
You have had more to do with my life than you  think"; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.
A  cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in  a flame of murky orange.
He shuddered.
"Shut the door behind you," he  whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.
Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression.
The room looked  as if it had not been lived in for years.
A faded Flemish tapestry, a  curtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost empty  book-case--that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and  a table.
As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was  standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered  with dust and that the carpet was in holes.
A mouse ran scuffling  behind the wainscoting.
There was a damp odour of mildew.
"So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil?
Draw that  curtain back, and you will see mine."    The voice that spoke was cold and cruel.
"You are mad, Dorian, or  playing a part," muttered Hallward, frowning.
"You won't?
Then I must do it myself," said the young man, and he tore  the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.
An exclamation of horror broke from the painter's lips as he saw in the  dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him.
There was  something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray's own face that he was looking at!  The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that  marvellous beauty.
There was still some gold in the thinning hair and  some scarlet on the sensual mouth.
The sodden eyes had kept something  of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet  completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat.
Yes, it was Dorian himself.
But who had done it?
He seemed to  recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design.
The  idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid.
He seized the lighted candle,  and held it to the picture.
In the left-hand corner was his own name,  traced in long letters of bright vermilion.
It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire.
He had never  done that.
Still, it was his own picture.
He knew it, and he felt as  if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice.
His  own picture!  What did it mean?
Why had it altered?
He turned and  looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man.
His mouth twitched,  and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate.
He passed his hand  across his forehead.
It was dank with clammy sweat.
The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with  that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are  absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting.
There was neither  real sorrow in it nor real joy.
There was simply the passion of the  spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes.
He had taken  the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.
"What does this mean?" cried Hallward, at last.
His own voice sounded  shrill and curious in his ears.
"Years ago, when I was a boy," said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in  his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my  good looks.
One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who  explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me  that revealed to me the wonder of beauty.
In a mad moment that, even  now, I don't know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps you  would call it a prayer...."    "I remember it!  Oh, how well I remember it!  No! the thing is  impossible.
The room is damp.
Mildew has got into the canvas.
The  paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them.
I tell you the  thing is impossible."    "Ah, what is impossible?" murmured the young man, going over to the  window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.
"You told me you had destroyed it."    "I was wrong.
It has destroyed me."    "I don't believe it is my picture."    "Can't you see your ideal in it?" said Dorian bitterly.
"My ideal, as you call it..."    "As you called it."    "There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful.
You were to me such  an ideal as I shall never meet again.
This is the face of a satyr."    "It is the face of my soul."    "Christ! what a thing I must have worshipped!  It has the eyes of a  devil."    "Each of us has heaven and hell in him, Basil," cried Dorian with a  wild gesture of despair.
Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it.
"My God!  If it  is true," he exclaimed, "and this is what you have done with your life,  why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you  to be!" He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it.
The  surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it.
It was  from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come.
Through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were  slowly eating the thing away.
The rotting of a corpse in a watery  grave was not so fearful.
His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and  lay there sputtering.
He placed his foot on it and put it out.
Then  he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table  and buried his face in his hands.
"Good God, Dorian, what a lesson!  What an awful lesson!" There was no  answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window.
"Pray,  Dorian, pray," he murmured.
"What is it that one was taught to say in  one's boyhood?
'Lead us not into temptation.
Forgive us our sins.
Wash away our iniquities.'  Let us say that together.
The prayer of  your pride has been answered.
The prayer of your repentance will be  answered also.
I worshipped you too much.
I am punished for it.
You  worshipped yourself too much.
We are both punished."    Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed  eyes.
"It is too late, Basil," he faltered.
"It is never too late, Dorian.
Let us kneel down and try if we cannot  remember a prayer.
Isn't there a verse somewhere, 'Though your sins be  as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow'?"    "Those words mean nothing to me now."    "Hush!  Don't say that.
You have done enough evil in your life.
My  God!  Don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?"    Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable  feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him, as though it had  been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his  ear by those grinning lips.
The mad passions of a hunted animal  stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table,  more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything.
He glanced  wildly around.
Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest  that faced him.
His eye fell on it.
He knew what it was.
It was a  knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord,  and had forgotten to take away with him.
He moved slowly towards it,  passing Hallward as he did so.
As soon as he got behind him, he seized  it and turned round.
Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going  to rise.
He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that  is behind the ear, crushing the man's head down on the table and  stabbing again and again.
There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking  with blood.
Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively,  waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air.
He stabbed him  twice more, but the man did not move.
Something began to trickle on  the floor.
He waited for a moment, still pressing the head down.
Then  he threw the knife on the table, and listened.
He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet.
He  opened the door and went out on the landing.
The house was absolutely  quiet.
No one was about.
For a few seconds he stood bending over the  balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness.
Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in  as he did so.
The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with  bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms.
Had it not been  for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was  slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was  simply asleep.
How quickly it had all been done!  He felt strangely calm, and walking  over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony.
The wind  had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock's  tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes.
He looked down and saw the  policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on  the doors of the silent houses.
The crimson spot of a prowling hansom  gleamed at the corner and then vanished.
A woman in a fluttering shawl  was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went.
Now and  then she stopped and peered back.
Once, she began to sing in a hoarse  voice.
The policeman strolled over and said something to her.
She  stumbled away, laughing.
A bitter blast swept across the square.
The  gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their  black iron branches to and fro.
He shivered and went back, closing the  window behind him.
Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it.
He did not  even glance at the murdered man.
He felt that the secret of the whole  thing was not to realize the situation.
The friend who had painted the  fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his  life.
That was enough.
Then he remembered the lamp.
It was a rather curious one of Moorish  workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished  steel, and studded with coarse turquoises.
Perhaps it might be missed  by his servant, and questions would be asked.
He hesitated for a  moment, then he turned back and took it from the table.
He could not  help seeing the dead thing.
How still it was!  How horribly white the  long hands looked!  It was like a dreadful wax image.
Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs.
The  woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain.
He stopped  several times and waited.
No:  everything was still.
It was merely  the sound of his own footsteps.
When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner.
They must be hidden away somewhere.
He unlocked a secret press that  was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious  disguises, and put them into it.
He could easily burn them afterwards.
Then he pulled out his watch.
It was twenty minutes to two.
He sat down and began to think.
Every year--every month, almost--men  were strangled in England for what he had done.
There had been a  madness of murder in the air.
Some red star had come too close to the  earth....
And yet, what evidence was there against him?
Basil Hallward  had left the house at eleven.
No one had seen him come in again.
Most  of the servants were at Selby Royal.
His valet had gone to bed....
Paris!  Yes.
It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight  train, as he had intended.
With his curious reserved habits, it would  be months before any suspicions would be roused.
Months!  Everything  could be destroyed long before then.
A sudden thought struck him.
He put on his fur coat and hat and went  out into the hall.
There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of  the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the  bull's-eye reflected in the window.
He waited and held his breath.
After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting  the door very gently behind him.
Then he began ringing the bell.
In  about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very  drowsy.
"I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis," he said, stepping in;  "but I had forgotten my latch-key.
What time is it?"    "Ten minutes past two, sir," answered the man, looking at the clock and  blinking.
"Ten minutes past two?
How horribly late!  You must wake me at nine  to-morrow.
I have some work to do."    "All right, sir."    "Did any one call this evening?"    "Mr. Hallward, sir.
He stayed here till eleven, and then he went away  to catch his train."    "Oh!  I am sorry I didn't see him.
Did he leave any message?"    "No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did not  find you at the club."    "That will do, Francis.
Don't forget to call me at nine to-morrow."    "No, sir."    The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.
Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the  library.
For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room,  biting his lip and thinking.
Then he took down the Blue Book from one  of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.
"Alan Campbell, 152,  Hertford Street, Mayfair."  Yes; that was the man he wanted.
At nine o'clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of  chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters.
Dorian was sleeping quite  peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his  cheek.
He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.
The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as  he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he  had been lost in some delightful dream.
Yet he had not dreamed at all.
His night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain.
But youth smiles without any reason.
It is one of its chiefest charms.
He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his  chocolate.
The mellow November sun came streaming into the room.
The  sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air.
It was  almost like a morning in May.
Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent,  blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there  with terrible distinctness.
He winced at the memory of all that he had  suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for  Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came  back to him, and he grew cold with passion.
The dead man was still  sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now.
How horrible that was!  Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.
He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken  or grow mad.
There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory  than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride  more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of  joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the  senses.
But this was not one of them.
It was a thing to be driven out  of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might  strangle one itself.
When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and  then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual  care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and  scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once.
He spent a long time  also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet  about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the  servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence.
At some of  the letters, he smiled.
Three of them bored him.
One he read several  times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his  face.
"That awful thing, a woman's memory!" as Lord Henry had once  said.
After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly  with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the  table, sat down and wrote two letters.
One he put in his pocket, the  other he handed to the valet.
"Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell  is out of town, get his address."    As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a  piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and  then human faces.
Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew  seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward.
He frowned, and  getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.
He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until  it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.
When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page  of the book.
It was Gautier's Emaux et Camees, Charpentier's  Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching.
The binding was  of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted  pomegranates.
It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton.
As he  turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of  Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand "_du supplice encore mal lavee_," with  its downy red hairs and its "_doigts de faune_."  He glanced at his own  white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and  passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice:         Sur une gamme chromatique,         Le sein de perles ruisselant,       La Venus de l'Adriatique         Sort de l'eau son corps rose et blanc.
Les domes, sur l'azur des ondes         Suivant la phrase au pur contour,       S'enflent comme des gorges rondes         Que souleve un soupir d'amour.
L'esquif aborde et me depose,         Jetant son amarre au pilier,       Devant une facade rose,         Sur le marbre d'un escalier.
How exquisite they were!  As one read them, one seemed to be floating  down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black  gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains.
The mere lines looked  to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as  one pushes out to the Lido.
The sudden flashes of colour reminded him  of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the  tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through  the dim, dust-stained arcades.
Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he  kept saying over and over to himself:         "Devant une facade rose,          Sur le marbre d'un escalier."    The whole of Venice was in those two lines.
He remembered the autumn  that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to  mad delightful follies.
There was romance in every place.
But Venice,  like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true  romantic, background was everything, or almost everything.
Basil had  been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret.
Poor  Basil!  What a horrible way for a man to die!    He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget.
He read  of the swallows that fly in and out of the little _cafe_ at Smyrna where  the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants  smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he  read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of  granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot,  lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and  white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes  that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those  verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that  curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "_monstre  charmant_" that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre.
But after a  time the book fell from his hand.
He grew nervous, and a horrible fit  of terror came over him.
What if Alan Campbell should be out of  England?
Days would elapse before he could come back.
Perhaps he  might refuse to come.
What could he do then?
Every moment was of  vital importance.
They had been great friends once, five years before--almost  inseparable, indeed.
Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end.
When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled:  Alan  Campbell never did.
He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real  appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the  beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian.
His  dominant intellectual passion was for science.
At Cambridge he had  spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken  a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year.
Indeed, he was  still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his  own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the  annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for  Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up  prescriptions.
He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and  played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs.
In  fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray  together--music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to  be able to exercise whenever he wished--and, indeed, exercised often  without being conscious of it.
They had met at Lady Berkshire's the  night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always  seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on.
For  eighteen months their intimacy lasted.
Campbell was always either at  Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square.
To him, as to many others, Dorian  Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in  life.
Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one  ever knew.
But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when  they met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any  party at which Dorian Gray was present.
He had changed, too--was  strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing  music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was  called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time  left in which to practise.
And this was certainly true.
Every day he  seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once  or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain  curious experiments.
This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for.
Every second he kept  glancing at the clock.
As the minutes went by he became horribly  agitated.
At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room,  looking like a beautiful caged thing.
He took long stealthy strides.
His hands were curiously cold.
The suspense became unbearable.
Time seemed to him to be crawling with  feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the  jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice.
He knew what was waiting  for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands  his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight  and driven the eyeballs back into their cave.
It was useless.
The  brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made  grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain,  danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving  masks.
Then, suddenly, time stopped for him.
Yes:  that blind,  slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being  dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its  grave, and showed it to him.
He stared at it.
Its very horror made  him stone.
At last the door opened and his servant entered.
He turned glazed eyes  upon him.
"Mr. Campbell, sir," said the man.
A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back  to his cheeks.
"Ask him to come in at once, Francis."  He felt that he was himself  again.
His mood of cowardice had passed away.
The man bowed and retired.
In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in,  looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his  coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.
"Alan!  This is kind of you.
I thank you for coming."    "I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray.
But you said it  was a matter of life and death."  His voice was hard and cold.
He  spoke with slow deliberation.
There was a look of contempt in the  steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian.
He kept his hands in  the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the  gesture with which he had been greeted.
"Yes:  it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one  person.
Sit down."    Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him.
The two men's eyes met.
In Dorian's there was infinite pity.
He knew  that what he was going to do was dreadful.
After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very  quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he  had sent for, "Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room  to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table.
He has been dead ten hours now.
Don't stir, and don't look at me like  that.
Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do  not concern you.
What you have to do is this--"    "Stop, Gray.
I don't want to know anything further.
Whether what you  have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me.
I entirely  decline to be mixed up in your life.
Keep your horrible secrets to  yourself.
They don't interest me any more."    "Alan, they will have to interest you.
This one will have to interest  you.
I am awfully sorry for you, Alan.
But I can't help myself.
You  are the one man who is able to save me.
I am forced to bring you into  the matter.
I have no option.
Alan, you are scientific.
You know  about chemistry and things of that kind.
You have made experiments.
What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs--to  destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left.
Nobody saw this  person come into the house.
Indeed, at the present moment he is  supposed to be in Paris.
He will not be missed for months.
When he is  missed, there must be no trace of him found here.
You, Alan, you must  change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes  that I may scatter in the air."    "You are mad, Dorian."    "Ah!  I was waiting for you to call me Dorian."    "You are mad, I tell you--mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to  help you, mad to make this monstrous confession.
I will have nothing  to do with this matter, whatever it is.
Do you think I am going to  peril my reputation for you?
What is it to me what devil's work you  are up to?"    "It was suicide, Alan."    "I am glad of that.
But who drove him to it?
You, I should fancy."    "Do you still refuse to do this for me?"    "Of course I refuse.
I will have absolutely nothing to do with it.
I  don't care what shame comes on you.
You deserve it all.
I should not  be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced.
How dare you ask  me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror?
I should  have thought you knew more about people's characters.
Your friend Lord  Henry Wotton can't have taught you much about psychology, whatever else  he has taught you.
Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you.
You have come to the wrong man.
Go to some of your friends.
Don't  come to me."    "Alan, it was murder.
I killed him.
You don't know what he had made  me suffer.
Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or  the marring of it than poor Harry has had.
He may not have intended  it, the result was the same."    "Murder!  Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to?
I shall not  inform upon you.
It is not my business.
Besides, without my stirring  in the matter, you are certain to be arrested.
Nobody ever commits a  crime without doing something stupid.
But I will have nothing to do  with it."    "You must have something to do with it.
Wait, wait a moment; listen to  me.
Only listen, Alan.
All I ask of you is to perform a certain  scientific experiment.
You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the  horrors that you do there don't affect you.
If in some hideous  dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a  leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow  through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject.
You  would not turn a hair.
You would not believe that you were doing  anything wrong.
On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were  benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the  world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind.
What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before.
Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are  accustomed to work at.
And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence  against me.
If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be  discovered unless you help me."    "I have no desire to help you.
You forget that.
I am simply  indifferent to the whole thing.
It has nothing to do with me."    "Alan, I entreat you.
Think of the position I am in.
Just before you  came I almost fainted with terror.
You may know terror yourself some  day.
No! don't think of that.
Look at the matter purely from the  scientific point of view.
You don't inquire where the dead things on  which you experiment come from.
Don't inquire now.
I have told you  too much as it is.
But I beg of you to do this.
We were friends once,  Alan."    "Don't speak about those days, Dorian--they are dead."    "The dead linger sometimes.
The man upstairs will not go away.
He is  sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms.
Alan!  Alan!  If you don't come to my assistance, I am ruined.
Why, they will  hang me, Alan!  Don't you understand?
They will hang me for what I  have done."    "There is no good in prolonging this scene.
I absolutely refuse to do  anything in the matter.
It is insane of you to ask me."    "You refuse?"    "Yes."    "I entreat you, Alan."    "It is useless."    The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray's eyes.
Then he stretched  out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it.
He  read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the  table.
Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.
Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and  opened it.
As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell  back in his chair.
A horrible sense of sickness came over him.
He  felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.
After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and  came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.
"I am so sorry for you, Alan," he murmured, "but you leave me no  alternative.
I have a letter written already.
Here it is.
You see  the address.
If you don't help me, I must send it.
If you don't help  me, I will send it.
You know what the result will be.
But you are  going to help me.
It is impossible for you to refuse now.
I tried to  spare you.
You will do me the justice to admit that.
You were stern,  harsh, offensive.
You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat  me--no living man, at any rate.
I bore it all.
Now it is for me to  dictate terms."    Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him.
"Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan.
You know what they are.
The thing is quite simple.
Come, don't work yourself into this fever.
The thing has to be done.
Face it, and do it."    A groan broke from Campbell's lips and he shivered all over.
The  ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing  time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be  borne.
He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his  forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already  come upon him.
The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead.
It was intolerable.
It seemed to crush him.
"Come, Alan, you must decide at once."    "I cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter  things.
"You must.
You have no choice.
Don't delay."    He hesitated a moment.
"Is there a fire in the room upstairs?"    "Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos."    "I shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory."    "No, Alan, you must not leave the house.
Write out on a sheet of  notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the  things back to you."    Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope  to his assistant.
Dorian took the note up and read it carefully.
Then  he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as  soon as possible and to bring the things with him.
As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up  from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece.
He was shivering with a  kind of ague.
For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke.
A  fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was  like the beat of a hammer.
As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian  Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears.
There was something in  the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him.
"You are infamous, absolutely infamous!" he muttered.
"Hush, Alan.
You have saved my life," said Dorian.
"Your life?
Good heavens! what a life that is!  You have gone from  corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime.
In  doing what I am going to do--what you force me to do--it is not of your  life that I am thinking."    "Ah, Alan," murmured Dorian with a sigh, "I wish you had a thousandth  part of the pity for me that I have for you." He turned away as he  spoke and stood looking out at the garden.
Campbell made no answer.
After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant  entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil  of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.
"Shall I leave the things here, sir?" he asked Campbell.
"Yes," said Dorian.
"And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another  errand for you.
What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies  Selby with orchids?"    "Harden, sir."    "Yes--Harden.
You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden  personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered,  and to have as few white ones as possible.
In fact, I don't want any  white ones.
It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty  place--otherwise I wouldn't bother you about it."    "No trouble, sir.
At what time shall I be back?"    Dorian looked at Campbell.
"How long will your experiment take, Alan?"  he said in a calm indifferent voice.
The presence of a third person in  the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.
Campbell frowned and bit his lip.
"It will take about five hours," he  answered.
"It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven,  Francis.
Or stay:  just leave my things out for dressing.
You can  have the evening to yourself.
I am not dining at home, so I shall not  want you."    "Thank you, sir," said the man, leaving the room.
"Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost.
How heavy this chest is!  I'll take it for you.
You bring the other things."  He spoke rapidly  and in an authoritative manner.
Campbell felt dominated by him.
They  left the room together.
When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned  it in the lock.
Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his  eyes.
He shuddered.
"I don't think I can go in, Alan," he murmured.
"It is nothing to me.
I don't require you," said Campbell coldly.
Dorian half opened the door.
As he did so, he saw the face of his  portrait leering in the sunlight.
On the floor in front of it the torn  curtain was lying.
He remembered that the night before he had  forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas,  and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.
What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on  one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood?
How horrible  it was!--more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the  silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing  whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that  it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.
He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with  half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that  he would not look even once upon the dead man.
Then, stooping down and  taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the  picture.
There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed  themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him.
He heard  Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other  things that he had required for his dreadful work.
He began to wonder  if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had  thought of each other.
"Leave me now," said a stern voice behind him.
He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been  thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a  glistening yellow face.
As he was going downstairs, he heard the key  being turned in the lock.
It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library.
He  was pale, but absolutely calm.
"I have done what you asked me to do,"  he muttered.
"And now, good-bye.
Let us never see each other again."    "You have saved me from ruin, Alan.
I cannot forget that," said Dorian  simply.
As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs.
There was a horrible  smell of nitric acid in the room.
But the thing that had been sitting  at the table was gone.
That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large  button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady  Narborough's drawing-room by bowing servants.
His forehead was  throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his  manner as he bent over his hostess's hand was as easy and graceful as  ever.
Perhaps one never seems so much at one's ease as when one has to  play a part.
Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could  have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any  tragedy of our age.
Those finely shaped fingers could never have  clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God  and goodness.
He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his  demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a  double life.
It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who  was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the  remains of really remarkable ugliness.
She had proved an excellent  wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her  husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed,  and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she  devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery,  and French _esprit_ when she could get it.
Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that  she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life.
"I know, my  dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you," she used to say,  "and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake.
It is most  fortunate that you were not thought of at the time.
As it was, our  bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to  raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody.
However, that was all Narborough's fault.
He was dreadfully  short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who  never sees anything."    Her guests this evening were rather tedious.
The fact was, as she  explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married  daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make  matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her.
"I think it  is most unkind of her, my dear," she whispered.
"Of course I go and  stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old  woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake  them up.
You don't know what an existence they lead down there.
It is  pure unadulterated country life.
They get up early, because they have  so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to  think about.
There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since  the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep  after dinner.
You shan't sit next either of them.
You shall sit by me  and amuse me."    Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room.
Yes:  it was certainly a tedious party.
Two of the people he had never seen  before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those  middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies,  but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an  overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always  trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to  her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against  her; Mrs.
Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and  Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess's daughter, a dowdy  dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once  seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked,  white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the  impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of  ideas.
He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the  great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the  mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed:  "How horrid of Henry Wotton to be  so late!  I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised  faithfully not to disappoint me."    It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door  opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some  insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.
But at dinner he could not eat anything.
Plate after plate went away  untasted.
Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called "an  insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you," and  now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence  and abstracted manner.
From time to time the butler filled his glass  with champagne.
He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.
"Dorian," said Lord Henry at last, as the _chaud-froid_ was being handed  round, "what is the matter with you to-night?
You are quite out of  sorts."    "I believe he is in love," cried Lady Narborough, "and that he is  afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous.
He is quite right.
I  certainly should."    "Dear Lady Narborough," murmured Dorian, smiling, "I have not been in  love for a whole week--not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left town."    "How you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady.
"I really cannot understand it."    "It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl,  Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry.
"She is the one link between us and  your short frocks."    "She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry.
But I  remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how _decolletee_  she was then."    "She is still _decolletee_," he answered, taking an olive in his long  fingers; "and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an  _edition de luxe_ of a bad French novel.
She is really wonderful, and  full of surprises.
Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary.
When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief."    "How can you, Harry!" cried Dorian.
"It is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess.
"But her  third husband, Lord Henry!  You don't mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?"    "Certainly, Lady Narborough."    "I don't believe a word of it."    "Well, ask Mr. Gray.
He is one of her most intimate friends."    "Is it true, Mr. Gray?"    "She assures me so, Lady Narborough," said Dorian.
"I asked her  whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and  hung at her girdle.
She told me she didn't, because none of them had  had any hearts at all."    "Four husbands!  Upon my word that is _trop de zele_."    "_Trop d'audace_, I tell her," said Dorian.
"Oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear.
And what is Ferrol  like?
I don't know him."    "The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes,"  said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.
Lady Narborough hit him with her fan.
"Lord Henry, I am not at all  surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked."    "But what world says that?" asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows.
"It can only be the next world.
This world and I are on excellent  terms."    "Everybody I know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady,  shaking her head.
Lord Henry looked serious for some moments.
"It is perfectly  monstrous," he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays saying  things against one behind one's back that are absolutely and entirely  true."    "Isn't he incorrigible?" cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.
"I hope so," said his hostess, laughing.
"But really, if you all  worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry  again so as to be in the fashion."    "You will never marry again, Lady Narborough," broke in Lord Henry.
"You were far too happy.
When a woman marries again, it is because she  detested her first husband.
When a man marries again, it is because he  adored his first wife.
Women try their luck; men risk theirs."    "Narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady.
"If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," was the  rejoinder.
"Women love us for our defects.
If we have enough of them,  they will forgive us everything, even our intellects.
You will never  ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough,  but it is quite true."    "Of course it is true, Lord Henry.
If we women did not love you for  your defects, where would you all be?
Not one of you would ever be  married.
You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors.
Not, however,  that that would alter you much.
Nowadays all the married men live like  bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men."    "_Fin de siecle_," murmured Lord Henry.
"_Fin du globe_," answered his hostess.
"I wish it were _fin du globe_," said Dorian with a sigh.
"Life is a  great disappointment."    "Ah, my dear," cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, "don't  tell me that you have exhausted life.
When a man says that one knows  that life has exhausted him.
Lord Henry is very wicked, and I  sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good--you look  so good.
I must find you a nice wife.
Lord Henry, don't you think  that Mr. Gray should get married?"    "I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry with a  bow.
"Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him.
I shall go  through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the  eligible young ladies."    "With their ages, Lady Narborough?" asked Dorian.
"Of course, with their ages, slightly edited.
But nothing must be done  in a hurry.
I want it to be what _The Morning Post_ calls a suitable  alliance, and I want you both to be happy."    "What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!" exclaimed Lord  Henry.
"A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love  her."    "Ah! what a cynic you are!" cried the old lady, pushing back her chair  and nodding to Lady Ruxton.
"You must come and dine with me soon  again.
You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir  Andrew prescribes for me.
You must tell me what people you would like  to meet, though.
I want it to be a delightful gathering."    "I like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered.
"Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?"    "I fear so," she said, laughing, as she stood up.
"A thousand pardons,  my dear Lady Ruxton," she added, "I didn't see you hadn't finished your  cigarette."    "Never mind, Lady Narborough.
I smoke a great deal too much.
I am  going to limit myself, for the future."    "Pray don't, Lady Ruxton," said Lord Henry.
"Moderation is a fatal  thing.
Enough is as bad as a meal.
More than enough is as good as a  feast."    Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously.
"You must come and explain that  to me some afternoon, Lord Henry.
It sounds a fascinating theory," she  murmured, as she swept out of the room.
"Now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal,"  cried Lady Narborough from the door.
"If you do, we are sure to  squabble upstairs."    The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the  table and came up to the top.
Dorian Gray changed his seat and went  and sat by Lord Henry.
Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about  the situation in the House of Commons.
He guffawed at his adversaries.
The word _doctrinaire_--word full of terror to the British  mind--reappeared from time to time between his explosions.
An  alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory.
He hoisted the  Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought.
The inherited stupidity of the  race--sound English common sense he jovially termed it--was shown to be  the proper bulwark for society.
A smile curved Lord Henry's lips, and he turned round and looked at  Dorian.
"Are you better, my dear fellow?" he asked.
"You seemed rather out of  sorts at dinner."    "I am quite well, Harry.
I am tired.
That is all."    "You were charming last night.
The little duchess is quite devoted to  you.
She tells me she is going down to Selby."    "She has promised to come on the twentieth."    "Is Monmouth to be there, too?"    "Oh, yes, Harry."    "He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her.
She is very  clever, too clever for a woman.
She lacks the indefinable charm of  weakness.
It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image  precious.
Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.
White porcelain feet, if you like.
They have been through the fire,  and what fire does not destroy, it hardens.
She has had experiences."    "How long has she been married?" asked Dorian.
"An eternity, she tells me.
I believe, according to the peerage, it is  ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity,  with time thrown in.
Who else is coming?"    "Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess, Geoffrey  Clouston, the usual set.
I have asked Lord Grotrian."    "I like him," said Lord Henry.
"A great many people don't, but I find  him charming.
He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by  being always absolutely over-educated.
He is a very modern type."    "I don't know if he will be able to come, Harry.
He may have to go to  Monte Carlo with his father."    "Ah! what a nuisance people's people are!  Try and make him come.
By  the way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night.
You left before  eleven.
What did you do afterwards?
Did you go straight home?"    Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.
"No, Harry," he said at last, "I did not get home till nearly three."    "Did you go to the club?"    "Yes," he answered.
Then he bit his lip.
"No, I don't mean that.
I  didn't go to the club.
I walked about.
I forget what I did....
How  inquisitive you are, Harry!  You always want to know what one has been  doing.
I always want to forget what I have been doing.
I came in at  half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time.
I had left my  latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in.
If you want any  corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."    Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"My dear fellow, as if I cared!  Let us go up to the drawing-room.
No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman.
Something has happened to you, Dorian.
Tell me what it is.
You are  not yourself to-night."    "Don't mind me, Harry.
I am irritable, and out of temper.
I shall  come round and see you to-morrow, or next day.
Make my excuses to Lady  Narborough.
I shan't go upstairs.
I shall go home.
I must go home."    "All right, Dorian.
I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time.
The duchess is coming."    "I will try to be there, Harry," he said, leaving the room.
As he  drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror  he thought he had strangled had come back to him.
Lord Henry's casual  questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted  his nerve still.
Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed.
He  winced.
He hated the idea of even touching them.
Yet it had to be done.
He realized that, and when he had locked the  door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had  thrust Basil Hallward's coat and bag.
A huge fire was blazing.
He  piled another log on it.
The smell of the singeing clothes and burning  leather was horrible.
It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume  everything.
At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some  Algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and  forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.
Suddenly he started.
His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed  nervously at his underlip.
Between two of the windows stood a large  Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue  lapis.
He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate  and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet  almost loathed.
His breath quickened.
A mad craving came over him.
He lit a cigarette and then threw it away.
His eyelids drooped till  the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek.
But he still watched  the cabinet.
At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been  lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden  spring.
A triangular drawer passed slowly out.
His fingers moved  instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something.
It was a  small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought,  the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with  round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads.
He opened it.
Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and  persistent.
He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his  face.
Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly  hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock.
It was twenty  minutes to twelve.
He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as  he did so, and went into his bedroom.
As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray,  dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept  quietly out of his house.
In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good  horse.
He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.
The man shook his head.
"It is too far for me," he muttered.
"Here is a sovereign for you," said Dorian.
"You shall have another if  you drive fast."    "All right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in an hour," and  after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly  towards the river.
A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly  in the dripping mist.
The public-houses were just closing, and dim men  and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors.
From  some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter.
In others,  drunkards brawled and screamed.
Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian  Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and  now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said  to him on the first day they had met, "To cure the soul by means of the  senses, and the senses by means of the soul."  Yes, that was the  secret.
He had often tried it, and would try it again now.
There were  opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the  memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were  new.
The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull.
From time to time a  huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it.
The  gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy.
Once the  man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile.
A steam rose from  the horse as it splashed up the puddles.
The sidewindows of the hansom  were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.
"To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of  the soul!"  How the words rang in his ears!  His soul, certainly, was  sick to death.
Was it true that the senses could cure it?
Innocent  blood had been spilled.
What could atone for that?
Ah! for that there  was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness  was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing  out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one.
Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done?
Who  had made him a judge over others?
He had said things that were  dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.
On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each  step.
He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster.
The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him.
His throat burned  and his delicate hands twitched nervously together.
He struck at the  horse madly with his stick.
The driver laughed and whipped up.
He  laughed in answer, and the man was silent.
The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some  sprawling spider.
The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist  thickened, he felt afraid.
Then they passed by lonely brickfields.
The fog was lighter here, and  he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange,  fanlike tongues of fire.
A dog barked as they went by, and far away in  the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed.
The horse stumbled in a  rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.
After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over  rough-paven streets.
Most of the windows were dark, but now and then  fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind.
He  watched them curiously.
They moved like monstrous marionettes and made  gestures like live things.
He hated them.
A dull rage was in his  heart.
As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from  an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred  yards.
The driver beat at them with his whip.
It is said that passion makes one think in a circle.
Certainly with  hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped  those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in  them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by  intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would  still have dominated his temper.
From cell to cell of his brain crept  the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all  man's appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre.
Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real,  became dear to him now for that very reason.
Ugliness was the one  reality.
The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of  disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more  vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious  shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song.
They were what he needed  for forgetfulness.
In three days he would be free.
Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane.
Over  the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black  masts of ships.
Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the  yards.
"Somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?" he asked huskily through the  trap.
Dorian started and peered round.
"This will do," he answered, and  having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had  promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay.
Here and  there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman.
The  light shook and splintered in the puddles.
A red glare came from an  outward-bound steamer that was coaling.
The slimy pavement looked like  a wet mackintosh.
He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he  was being followed.
In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small  shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories.
In one of  the top-windows stood a lamp.
He stopped and gave a peculiar knock.
After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being  unhooked.
The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a  word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the  shadow as he passed.
At the end of the hall hung a tattered green  curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him  in from the street.
He dragged it aside and entered a long low room  which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon.
Shrill  flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that  faced them, were ranged round the walls.
Greasy reflectors of ribbed  tin backed them, making quivering disks of light.
The floor was  covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud,  and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor.
Some Malays were  crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and  showing their white teeth as they chattered.
In one corner, with his  head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the  tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two  haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his  coat with an expression of disgust.
"He thinks he's got red ants on  him," laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by.
The man looked at her  in terror and began to whimper.
At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a  darkened chamber.
As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the  heavy odour of opium met him.
He heaved a deep breath, and his  nostrils quivered with pleasure.
When he entered, a young man with  smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin  pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.
"You here, Adrian?" muttered Dorian.
"Where else should I be?" he answered, listlessly.
"None of the chaps  will speak to me now."    "I thought you had left England."    "Darlington is not going to do anything.
My brother paid the bill at  last.
George doesn't speak to me either....
I don't care," he added  with a sigh.
"As long as one has this stuff, one doesn't want friends.
I think I have had too many friends."    Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such  fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses.
The twisted limbs, the  gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him.
He knew in  what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were  teaching them the secret of some new joy.
They were better off than he  was.
He was prisoned in thought.
Memory, like a horrible malady, was  eating his soul away.
From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of  Basil Hallward looking at him.
Yet he felt he could not stay.
The  presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him.
He wanted to be where no  one would know who he was.
He wanted to escape from himself.
"I am going on to the other place," he said after a pause.
"On the wharf?"    "Yes."    "That mad-cat is sure to be there.
They won't have her in this place  now."    Dorian shrugged his shoulders.
"I am sick of women who love one.
Women who hate one are much more interesting.
Besides, the stuff is  better."    "Much the same."    "I like it better.
Come and have something to drink.
I must have  something."    "I don't want anything," murmured the young man.
"Never mind."    Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar.
A  half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous  greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of  them.
The women sidled up and began to chatter.
Dorian turned his  back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.
A crooked smile, like a Malay crease, writhed across the face of one of  the women.
"We are very proud to-night," she sneered.
"For God's sake don't talk to me," cried Dorian, stamping his foot on  the ground.
"What do you want?
Money?
Here it is.
Don't ever talk  to me again."    Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman's sodden eyes, then  flickered out and left them dull and glazed.
She tossed her head and  raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers.
Her companion  watched her enviously.
"It's no use," sighed Adrian Singleton.
"I don't care to go back.
What does it matter?
I am quite happy here."    "You will write to me if you want anything, won't you?" said Dorian,  after a pause.
"Perhaps."    "Good night, then."    "Good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping  his parched mouth with a handkerchief.
Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face.
As he drew  the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the  woman who had taken his money.
"There goes the devil's bargain!" she  hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.
"Curse you!" he answered, "don't call me that."    She snapped her fingers.
"Prince Charming is what you like to be  called, ain't it?" she yelled after him.
The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly  round.
The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear.
He  rushed out as if in pursuit.
Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain.
His  meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered  if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as  Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult.
He bit his  lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad.
Yet, after all, what did  it matter to him?
One's days were too brief to take the burden of  another's errors on one's shoulders.
Each man lived his own life and  paid his own price for living it.
The only pity was one had to pay so  often for a single fault.
One had to pay over and over again, indeed.
In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.
There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or  for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of  the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful  impulses.
Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their  will.
They move to their terrible end as automatons move.
Choice is  taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at  all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its  charm.
For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are  sins of disobedience.
When that high spirit, that morning star of  evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.
Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for  rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but  as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a  short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself  suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself,  he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his  throat.
He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the  tightening fingers away.
In a second he heard the click of a revolver,  and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head,  and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.
"What do you want?" he gasped.
"Keep quiet," said the man.
"If you stir, I shoot you."    "You are mad.
What have I done to you?"    "You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane," was the answer, "and Sibyl Vane  was my sister.
She killed herself.
I know it.
Her death is at your  door.
I swore I would kill you in return.
For years I have sought  you.
I had no clue, no trace.
The two people who could have described  you were dead.
I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call  you.
I heard it to-night by chance.
Make your peace with God, for  to-night you are going to die."    Dorian Gray grew sick with fear.
"I never knew her," he stammered.
"I  never heard of her.
You are mad."    "You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you  are going to die."  There was a horrible moment.
Dorian did not know  what to say or do.
"Down on your knees!" growled the man.
"I give you  one minute to make your peace--no more.
I go on board to-night for  India, and I must do my job first.
One minute.
That's all."    Dorian's arms fell to his side.
Paralysed with terror, he did not know  what to do.
Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain.
"Stop," he  cried.
"How long ago is it since your sister died?
Quick, tell me!"    "Eighteen years," said the man.
"Why do you ask me?
What do years  matter?"    "Eighteen years," laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph in his  voice.
"Eighteen years!  Set me under the lamp and look at my face!"    James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant.
Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.
Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him  the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face  of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the  unstained purity of youth.
He seemed little more than a lad of twenty  summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been  when they had parted so many years ago.
It was obvious that this was  not the man who had destroyed her life.
He loosened his hold and reeled back.
"My God! my God!" he cried, "and  I would have murdered you!"    Dorian Gray drew a long breath.
"You have been on the brink of  committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly.
"Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own  hands."    "Forgive me, sir," muttered James Vane.
"I was deceived.
A chance  word I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track."    "You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into  trouble," said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the  street.
James Vane stood on the pavement in horror.
He was trembling from head  to foot.
After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping  along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him  with stealthy footsteps.
He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked  round with a start.
It was one of the women who had been drinking at  the bar.
"Why didn't you kill him?" she hissed out, putting haggard face quite  close to his.
"I knew you were following him when you rushed out from  Daly's.
You fool!  You should have killed him.
He has lots of money,  and he's as bad as bad."    "He is not the man I am looking for," he answered, "and I want no man's  money.
I want a man's life.
The man whose life I want must be nearly  forty now.
This one is little more than a boy.
Thank God, I have not  got his blood upon my hands."    The woman gave a bitter laugh.
"Little more than a boy!" she sneered.
"Why, man, it's nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me  what I am."    "You lie!" cried James Vane.
She raised her hand up to heaven.
"Before God I am telling the truth,"  she cried.
"Before God?"    "Strike me dumb if it ain't so.
He is the worst one that comes here.
They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face.
It's nigh  on eighteen years since I met him.
He hasn't changed much since then.
I have, though," she added, with a sickly leer.
"You swear this?"    "I swear it," came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth.
"But don't give  me away to him," she whined; "I am afraid of him.
Let me have some  money for my night's lodging."    He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street,  but Dorian Gray had disappeared.
When he looked back, the woman had  vanished also.
A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby  Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband,  a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests.
It was tea-time,  and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the  table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at  which the duchess was presiding.
Her white hands were moving daintily  among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that  Dorian had whispered to her.
Lord Henry was lying back in a  silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them.
On a peach-coloured divan  sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke's description of  the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection.
Three  young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of  the women.
The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were  more expected to arrive on the next day.
"What are you two talking about?" said Lord Henry, strolling over to  the table and putting his cup down.
"I hope Dorian has told you about  my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys.
It is a delightful idea."    "But I don't want to be rechristened, Harry," rejoined the duchess,  looking up at him with her wonderful eyes.
"I am quite satisfied with  my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his."    "My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world.
They are  both perfect.
I was thinking chiefly of flowers.
Yesterday I cut an  orchid, for my button-hole.
It was a marvellous spotted thing, as  effective as the seven deadly sins.
In a thoughtless moment I asked  one of the gardeners what it was called.
He told me it was a fine  specimen of _Robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind.
It is a  sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to  things.
Names are everything.
I never quarrel with actions.
My one  quarrel is with words.
That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in  literature.
The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled  to use one.
It is the only thing he is fit for."    "Then what should we call you, Harry?" she asked.
"His name is Prince Paradox," said Dorian.
"I recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess.
"I won't hear of it," laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair.
"From  a label there is no escape!  I refuse the title."    "Royalties may not abdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips.
"You wish me to defend my throne, then?"    "Yes."    "I give the truths of to-morrow."    "I prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered.
"You disarm me, Gladys," he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.
"Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear."    "I never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wave of his hand.
"That is your error, Harry, believe me.
You value beauty far too much."    "How can you say that?
I admit that I think that it is better to be  beautiful than to be good.
But on the other hand, no one is more ready  than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly."    "Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?" cried the duchess.
"What becomes of your simile about the orchid?"    "Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys.
You, as a good  Tory, must not underrate them.
Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly  virtues have made our England what she is."    "You don't like your country, then?" she asked.
"I live in it."    "That you may censure it the better."    "Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?" he inquired.
"What do they say of us?"    "That Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop."    "Is that yours, Harry?"    "I give it to you."    "I could not use it.
It is too true."    "You need not be afraid.
Our countrymen never recognize a description."    "They are practical."    "They are more cunning than practical.
When they make up their ledger,  they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy."    "Still, we have done great things."    "Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys."    "We have carried their burden."    "Only as far as the Stock Exchange."    She shook her head.
"I believe in the race," she cried.
"It represents the survival of the pushing."    "It has development."    "Decay fascinates me more."    "What of art?" she asked.
"It is a malady."    "Love?"    "An illusion."    "Religion?"    "The fashionable substitute for belief."    "You are a sceptic."    "Never!  Scepticism is the beginning of faith."    "What are you?"    "To define is to limit."    "Give me a clue."    "Threads snap.
You would lose your way in the labyrinth."    "You bewilder me.
Let us talk of some one else."    "Our host is a delightful topic.
Years ago he was christened Prince  Charming."    "Ah! don't remind me of that," cried Dorian Gray.
"Our host is rather horrid this evening," answered the duchess,  colouring.
"I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely  scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern  butterfly."    "Well, I hope he won't stick pins into you, Duchess," laughed Dorian.
"Oh! my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with me."    "And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?"    "For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you.
Usually because  I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by  half-past eight."    "How unreasonable of her!  You should give her warning."    "I daren't, Mr. Gray.
Why, she invents hats for me.
You remember the  one I wore at Lady Hilstone's garden-party?
You don't, but it is nice  of you to pretend that you do.
Well, she made it out of nothing.
All  good hats are made out of nothing."    "Like all good reputations, Gladys," interrupted Lord Henry.
"Every  effect that one produces gives one an enemy.
To be popular one must be  a mediocrity."    "Not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women rule  the world.
I assure you we can't bear mediocrities.
We women, as some  one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if  you ever love at all."    "It seems to me that we never do anything else," murmured Dorian.
"Ah! then, you never really love, Mr. Gray," answered the duchess with  mock sadness.
"My dear Gladys!" cried Lord Henry.
"How can you say that?
Romance  lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art.
Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved.
Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion.
It merely  intensifies it.
We can have in life but one great experience at best,  and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as  possible."    "Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?" asked the duchess after  a pause.
"Especially when one has been wounded by it," answered Lord Henry.
The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression  in her eyes.
"What do you say to that, Mr. Gray?" she inquired.
Dorian hesitated for a moment.
Then he threw his head back and  laughed.
"I always agree with Harry, Duchess."    "Even when he is wrong?"    "Harry is never wrong, Duchess."    "And does his philosophy make you happy?"    "I have never searched for happiness.
Who wants happiness?
I have  searched for pleasure."    "And found it, Mr. Gray?"    "Often.
Too often."    The duchess sighed.
"I am searching for peace," she said, "and if I  don't go and dress, I shall have none this evening."    "Let me get you some orchids, Duchess," cried Dorian, starting to his  feet and walking down the conservatory.
"You are flirting disgracefully with him," said Lord Henry to his  cousin.
"You had better take care.
He is very fascinating."    "If he were not, there would be no battle."    "Greek meets Greek, then?"    "I am on the side of the Trojans.
They fought for a woman."    "They were defeated."    "There are worse things than capture," she answered.
"You gallop with a loose rein."    "Pace gives life," was the _riposte_.
"I shall write it in my diary to-night."    "What?"    "That a burnt child loves the fire."    "I am not even singed.
My wings are untouched."    "You use them for everything, except flight."    "Courage has passed from men to women.
It is a new experience for us."    "You have a rival."    "Who?"    He laughed.
"Lady Narborough," he whispered.
"She perfectly adores  him."    "You fill me with apprehension.
The appeal to antiquity is fatal to us  who are romanticists."    "Romanticists!  You have all the methods of science."    "Men have educated us."    "But not explained you."    "Describe us as a sex," was her challenge.
"Sphinxes without secrets."    She looked at him, smiling.
"How long Mr. Gray is!" she said.
"Let us  go and help him.
I have not yet told him the colour of my frock."    "Ah! you must suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys."    "That would be a premature surrender."    "Romantic art begins with its climax."    "I must keep an opportunity for retreat."    "In the Parthian manner?"    "They found safety in the desert.
I could not do that."    "Women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but hardly had he  finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came  a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall.
Everybody  started up.
The duchess stood motionless in horror.
And with fear in  his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian  Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.
He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of  the sofas.
After a short time, he came to himself and looked round  with a dazed expression.
"What has happened?" he asked.
"Oh!  I remember.
Am I safe here,  Harry?" He began to tremble.
"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, "you merely fainted.
That was  all.
You must have overtired yourself.
You had better not come down  to dinner.
I will take your place."    "No, I will come down," he said, struggling to his feet.
"I would  rather come down.
I must not be alone."    He went to his room and dressed.
There was a wild recklessness of  gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of  terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the  window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the  face of James Vane watching him.
The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the  time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet  indifferent to life itself.
The consciousness of being hunted, snared,  tracked down, had begun to dominate him.
If the tapestry did but  tremble in the wind, he shook.
The dead leaves that were blown against  the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild  regrets.
When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor's face  peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to  lay its hand upon his heart.
But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of  the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him.
Actual  life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the  imagination.
It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet  of sin.
It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen  brood.
In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor  the good rewarded.
Success was given to the strong, failure thrust  upon the weak.
That was all.
Besides, had any stranger been prowling  round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the  keepers.
Had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the  gardeners would have reported it.
Yes, it had been merely fancy.
Sibyl Vane's brother had not come back to kill him.
He had sailed away  in his ship to founder in some winter sea.
From him, at any rate, he  was safe.
Why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he  was.
The mask of youth had saved him.
And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think  that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them  visible form, and make them move before one!  What sort of life would  his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from  silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear  as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep!  As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and  the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder.
Oh! in what a  wild hour of madness he had killed his friend!  How ghastly the mere  memory of the scene!  He saw it all again.
Each hideous detail came  back to him with added horror.
Out of the black cave of time, terrible  and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin.
When Lord Henry  came in at six o'clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will  break.
It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out.
There was  something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that  seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life.
But  it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had  caused the change.
His own nature had revolted against the excess of  anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm.
With subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so.
Their  strong passions must either bruise or bend.
They either slay the man,  or themselves die.
Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on.
The  loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude.
Besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a  terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with  something of pity and not a little of contempt.
After breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden  and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party.
The crisp  frost lay like salt upon the grass.
The sky was an inverted cup of  blue metal.
A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.
At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoffrey  Clouston, the duchess's brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of  his gun.
He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take  the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered  bracken and rough undergrowth.
"Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?" he asked.
"Not very good, Dorian.
I think most of the birds have gone to the  open.
I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new  ground."    Dorian strolled along by his side.
The keen aromatic air, the brown  and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the  beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns  that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful  freedom.
He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the  high indifference of joy.
Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front  of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it  forward, started a hare.
It bolted for a thicket of alders.
Sir  Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the  animal's grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he  cried out at once, "Don't shoot it, Geoffrey.
Let it live."    "What nonsense, Dorian!" laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded  into the thicket, he fired.
There were two cries heard, the cry of a  hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is  worse.
"Good heavens!  I have hit a beater!" exclaimed Sir Geoffrey.
"What an  ass the man was to get in front of the guns!  Stop shooting there!" he  called out at the top of his voice.
"A man is hurt."    The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.
"Where, sir?
Where is he?" he shouted.
At the same time, the firing  ceased along the line.
"Here," answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket.
"Why on earth don't you keep your men back?
Spoiled my shooting for  the day."    Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the  lithe swinging branches aside.
In a few moments they emerged, dragging  a body after them into the sunlight.
He turned away in horror.
It  seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went.
He heard Sir  Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of  the keeper.
The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with  faces.
There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of  voices.
A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the  boughs overhead.
After a few moments--that were to him, in his perturbed state, like  endless hours of pain--he felt a hand laid on his shoulder.
He started  and looked round.
"Dorian," said Lord Henry, "I had better tell them that the shooting is  stopped for to-day.
It would not look well to go on."    "I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry," he answered bitterly.
"The  whole thing is hideous and cruel.
Is the man ...?"    He could not finish the sentence.
"I am afraid so," rejoined Lord Henry.
"He got the whole charge of  shot in his chest.
He must have died almost instantaneously.
Come;  let us go home."    They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly  fifty yards without speaking.
Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and  said, with a heavy sigh, "It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen."    "What is?" asked Lord Henry.
"Oh! this accident, I suppose.
My dear  fellow, it can't be helped.
It was the man's own fault.
Why did he  get in front of the guns?
Besides, it is nothing to us.
It is rather  awkward for Geoffrey, of course.
It does not do to pepper beaters.
It  makes people think that one is a wild shot.
And Geoffrey is not; he  shoots very straight.
But there is no use talking about the matter."    Dorian shook his head.
"It is a bad omen, Harry.
I feel as if  something horrible were going to happen to some of us.
To myself,  perhaps," he added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of  pain.
The elder man laughed.
"The only horrible thing in the world is _ennui_,  Dorian.
That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness.
But we  are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering  about this thing at dinner.
I must tell them that the subject is to be  tabooed.
As for omens, there is no such thing as an omen.
Destiny  does not send us heralds.
She is too wise or too cruel for that.
Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian?
You have  everything in the world that a man can want.
There is no one who would  not be delighted to change places with you."    "There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry.
Don't  laugh like that.
I am telling you the truth.
The wretched peasant who  has just died is better off than I am.
I have no terror of death.
It  is the coming of death that terrifies me.
Its monstrous wings seem to  wheel in the leaden air around me.
Good heavens! don't you see a man  moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?"    Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand  was pointing.
"Yes," he said, smiling, "I see the gardener waiting for  you.
I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on  the table to-night.
How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow!  You  must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town."    Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching.
The  man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating  manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master.
"Her Grace told me to wait for an answer," he murmured.
Dorian put the letter into his pocket.
"Tell her Grace that I am  coming in," he said, coldly.
The man turned round and went rapidly in  the direction of the house.
"How fond women are of doing dangerous things!" laughed Lord Henry.
"It is one of the qualities in them that I admire most.
A woman will  flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on."    "How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry!  In the present  instance, you are quite astray.
I like the duchess very much, but I  don't love her."    "And the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you  are excellently matched."    "You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for  scandal."    "The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said Lord Henry,  lighting a cigarette.
"You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram."    "The world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the answer.
"I wish I could love," cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in  his voice.
"But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the  desire.
I am too much concentrated on myself.
My own personality has  become a burden to me.
I want to escape, to go away, to forget.
It  was silly of me to come down here at all.
I think I shall send a wire  to Harvey to have the yacht got ready.
On a yacht one is safe."    "Safe from what, Dorian?
You are in some trouble.
Why not tell me  what it is?
You know I would help you."    "I can't tell you, Harry," he answered sadly.
"And I dare say it is  only a fancy of mine.
This unfortunate accident has upset me.
I have  a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me."    "What nonsense!"    "I hope it is, but I can't help feeling it.
Ah! here is the duchess,  looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown.
You see we have come back,  Duchess."    "I have heard all about it, Mr. Gray," she answered.
"Poor Geoffrey is  terribly upset.
And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare.
How curious!"    "Yes, it was very curious.
I don't know what made me say it.
Some  whim, I suppose.
It looked the loveliest of little live things.
But I  am sorry they told you about the man.
It is a hideous subject."    "It is an annoying subject," broke in Lord Henry.
"It has no  psychological value at all.
Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on  purpose, how interesting he would be!  I should like to know some one  who had committed a real murder."    "How horrid of you, Harry!" cried the duchess.
"Isn't it, Mr. Gray?
Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again.
He is going to faint."    Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled.
"It is nothing,  Duchess," he murmured; "my nerves are dreadfully out of order.
That is  all.
I am afraid I walked too far this morning.
I didn't hear what  Harry said.
Was it very bad?
You must tell me some other time.
I  think I must go and lie down.
You will excuse me, won't you?"    They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the  conservatory on to the terrace.
As the glass door closed behind  Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous  eyes.
"Are you very much in love with him?" he asked.
She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape.
"I wish I knew," she said at last.
He shook his head.
"Knowledge would be fatal.
It is the uncertainty  that charms one.
A mist makes things wonderful."    "One may lose one's way."    "All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys."    "What is that?"    "Disillusion."    "It was my _debut_ in life," she sighed.
"It came to you crowned."    "I am tired of strawberry leaves."    "They become you."    "Only in public."    "You would miss them," said Lord Henry.
"I will not part with a petal."    "Monmouth has ears."    "Old age is dull of hearing."    "Has he never been jealous?"    "I wish he had been."    He glanced about as if in search of something.
"What are you looking  for?" she inquired.
"The button from your foil," he answered.
"You have dropped it."    She laughed.
"I have still the mask."    "It makes your eyes lovelier," was his reply.
She laughed again.
Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet  fruit.
Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror  in every tingling fibre of his body.
Life had suddenly become too  hideous a burden for him to bear.
The dreadful death of the unlucky  beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to  pre-figure death for himself also.
He had nearly swooned at what Lord  Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.
At five o'clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to  pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham  at the door by eight-thirty.
He was determined not to sleep another  night at Selby Royal.
It was an ill-omened place.
Death walked there  in the sunlight.
The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.
Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up to  town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in  his absence.
As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to  the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see  him.
He frowned and bit his lip.
"Send him in," he muttered, after  some moments' hesitation.
As soon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a  drawer and spread it out before him.
"I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this  morning, Thornton?" he said, taking up a pen.
"Yes, sir," answered the gamekeeper.
"Was the poor fellow married?
Had he any people dependent on him?"  asked Dorian, looking bored.
"If so, I should not like them to be left  in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary."    "We don't know who he is, sir.
That is what I took the liberty of  coming to you about."    "Don't know who he is?" said Dorian, listlessly.
"What do you mean?
Wasn't he one of your men?"    "No, sir.
Never saw him before.
Seems like a sailor, sir."    The pen dropped from Dorian Gray's hand, and he felt as if his heart  had suddenly stopped beating.
"A sailor?" he cried out.
"Did you say  a sailor?"    "Yes, sir.
He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on  both arms, and that kind of thing."    "Was there anything found on him?" said Dorian, leaning forward and  looking at the man with startled eyes.
"Anything that would tell his  name?"    "Some money, sir--not much, and a six-shooter.
There was no name of any  kind.
A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like.
A sort of sailor we  think."    Dorian started to his feet.
A terrible hope fluttered past him.
He  clutched at it madly.
"Where is the body?" he exclaimed.
"Quick!  I  must see it at once."    "It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir.
The folk don't like  to have that sort of thing in their houses.
They say a corpse brings  bad luck."    "The Home Farm!  Go there at once and meet me.
Tell one of the grooms  to bring my horse round.
No. Never mind.
I'll go to the stables  myself.
It will save time."    In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the  long avenue as hard as he could go.
The trees seemed to sweep past him  in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his  path.
Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him.
He lashed her across the neck with his crop.
She cleft the dusky air  like an arrow.
The stones flew from her hoofs.
At last he reached the Home Farm.
Two men were loitering in the yard.
He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them.
In the  farthest stable a light was glimmering.
Something seemed to tell him  that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand  upon the latch.
There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a  discovery that would either make or mar his life.
Then he thrust the  door open and entered.
On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man  dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers.
A spotted  handkerchief had been placed over the face.
A coarse candle, stuck in  a bottle, sputtered beside it.
Dorian Gray shuddered.
He felt that his could not be the hand to take  the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to  come to him.
"Take that thing off the face.
I wish to see it," he said, clutching  at the door-post for support.
When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward.
A cry of joy  broke from his lips.
The man who had been shot in the thicket was  James Vane.
He stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body.
As he rode  home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.
"There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good," cried  Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled  with rose-water.
"You are quite perfect.
Pray, don't change."    Dorian Gray shook his head.
"No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful  things in my life.
I am not going to do any more.
I began my good  actions yesterday."    "Where were you yesterday?"    "In the country, Harry.
I was staying at a little inn by myself."    "My dear boy," said Lord Henry, smiling, "anybody can be good in the  country.
There are no temptations there.
That is the reason why  people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized.
Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to.
There are  only two ways by which man can reach it.
One is by being cultured, the  other by being corrupt.
Country people have no opportunity of being  either, so they stagnate."    "Culture and corruption," echoed Dorian.
"I have known something of  both.
It seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found  together.
For I have a new ideal, Harry.
I am going to alter.
I  think I have altered."    "You have not yet told me what your good action was.
Or did you say  you had done more than one?" asked his companion as he spilled into his  plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a  perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.
"I can tell you, Harry.
It is not a story I could tell to any one  else.
I spared somebody.
It sounds vain, but you understand what I  mean.
She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane.
I  think it was that which first attracted me to her.
You remember Sibyl,  don't you?
How long ago that seems!  Well, Hetty was not one of our  own class, of course.
She was simply a girl in a village.
But I  really loved her.
I am quite sure that I loved her.
All during this  wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her  two or three times a week.
Yesterday she met me in a little orchard.
The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was  laughing.
We were to have gone away together this morning at dawn.
Suddenly I determined to leave her as flowerlike as I had found her."    "I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill  of real pleasure, Dorian," interrupted Lord Henry.
"But I can finish  your idyll for you.
You gave her good advice and broke her heart.
That was the beginning of your reformation."    "Harry, you are horrible!  You mustn't say these dreadful things.
Hetty's heart is not broken.
Of course, she cried and all that.
But  there is no disgrace upon her.
She can live, like Perdita, in her  garden of mint and marigold."    "And weep over a faithless Florizel," said Lord Henry, laughing, as he  leaned back in his chair.
"My dear Dorian, you have the most curiously  boyish moods.
Do you think this girl will ever be really content now  with any one of her own rank?
I suppose she will be married some day  to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman.
Well, the fact of having  met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she  will be wretched.
From a moral point of view, I cannot say that I  think much of your great renunciation.
Even as a beginning, it is  poor.
Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn't floating at the  present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies  round her, like Ophelia?"    "I can't bear this, Harry!  You mock at everything, and then suggest  the most serious tragedies.
I am sorry I told you now.
I don't care  what you say to me.
I know I was right in acting as I did.
Poor  Hetty!  As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at  the window, like a spray of jasmine.
Don't let us talk about it any  more, and don't try to persuade me that the first good action I have  done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever  known, is really a sort of sin.
I want to be better.
I am going to be  better.
Tell me something about yourself.
What is going on in town?
I have not been to the club for days."    "The people are still discussing poor Basil's disappearance."    "I should have thought they had got tired of that by this time," said  Dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.
"My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and  the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having  more than one topic every three months.
They have been very fortunate  lately, however.
They have had my own divorce-case and Alan Campbell's  suicide.
Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist.
Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left  for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor  Basil, and the French police declare that Basil never arrived in Paris  at all.
I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has  been seen in San Francisco.
It is an odd thing, but every one who  disappears is said to be seen at San Francisco.
It must be a  delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world."    "What do you think has happened to Basil?" asked Dorian, holding up his  Burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could  discuss the matter so calmly.
"I have not the slightest idea.
If Basil chooses to hide himself, it  is no business of mine.
If he is dead, I don't want to think about  him.
Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me.
I hate it."    "Why?" said the younger man wearily.
"Because," said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt  trellis of an open vinaigrette box, "one can survive everything  nowadays except that.
Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in  the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away.
Let us have our  coffee in the music-room, Dorian.
You must play Chopin to me.
The man  with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely.
Poor Victoria!  I was very fond of her.
The house is rather lonely without her.
Of  course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit.
But then one  regrets the loss even of one's worst habits.
Perhaps one regrets them  the most.
They are such an essential part of one's personality."    Dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next  room, sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white  and black ivory of the keys.
After the coffee had been brought in, he  stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, "Harry, did it ever  occur to you that Basil was murdered?"    Lord Henry yawned.
"Basil was very popular, and always wore a  Waterbury watch.
Why should he have been murdered?
He was not clever  enough to have enemies.
Of course, he had a wonderful genius for  painting.
But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull as  possible.
Basil was really rather dull.
He only interested me once,  and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration  for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art."    "I was very fond of Basil," said Dorian with a note of sadness in his  voice.
"But don't people say that he was murdered?"    "Oh, some of the papers do.
It does not seem to me to be at all  probable.
I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not  the sort of man to have gone to them.
He had no curiosity.
It was his  chief defect."    "What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered Basil?"  said the younger man.
He watched him intently after he had spoken.
"I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that  doesn't suit you.
All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.
It is not in you, Dorian, to commit a murder.
I am sorry if I hurt  your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true.
Crime belongs  exclusively to the lower orders.
I don't blame them in the smallest  degree.
I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us,  simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations."    "A method of procuring sensations?
Do you think, then, that a man who  has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again?
Don't tell me that."    "Oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often," cried Lord  Henry, laughing.
"That is one of the most important secrets of life.
I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake.
One should  never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner.
But let us  pass from poor Basil.
I wish I could believe that he had come to such  a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can't.
I dare say he fell  into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the  scandal.
Yes:  I should fancy that was his end.
I see him lying now  on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges  floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair.
Do you know, I  don't think he would have done much more good work.
During the last  ten years his painting had gone off very much."    Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began  to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged  bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo  perch.
As his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf  of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards  and forwards.
"Yes," he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of  his pocket; "his painting had quite gone off.
It seemed to me to have  lost something.
It had lost an ideal.
When you and he ceased to be  great friends, he ceased to be a great artist.
What was it separated  you?
I suppose he bored you.
If so, he never forgave you.
It's a  habit bores have.
By the way, what has become of that wonderful  portrait he did of you?
I don't think I have ever seen it since he  finished it.
Oh!  I remember your telling me years ago that you had  sent it down to Selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the  way.
You never got it back?
What a pity! it was really a  masterpiece.
I remember I wanted to buy it.
I wish I had now.
It  belonged to Basil's best period.
Since then, his work was that curious  mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man  to be called a representative British artist.
Did you advertise for  it?
You should."    "I forget," said Dorian.
"I suppose I did.
But I never really liked  it.
I am sorry I sat for it.
The memory of the thing is hateful to  me.
Why do you talk of it?
It used to remind me of those curious  lines in some play--Hamlet, I think--how do they run?--        "Like the painting of a sorrow,       A face without a heart."    Yes:  that is what it was like."    Lord Henry laughed.
"If a man treats life artistically, his brain is  his heart," he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.
Dorian Gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano.
"'Like the painting of a sorrow,'" he repeated, "'a face without a  heart.'"    The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes.
"By  the way, Dorian," he said after a pause, "'what does it profit a man if  he gain the whole world and lose--how does the quotation run?--his own  soul'?"    The music jarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his friend.
"Why do you ask me that, Harry?"    "My dear fellow," said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise,  "I asked you because I thought you might be able to give me an answer.
That is all.
I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by  the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people  listening to some vulgar street-preacher.
As I passed by, I heard the  man yelling out that question to his audience.
It struck me as being  rather dramatic.
London is very rich in curious effects of that kind.
A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly  white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful  phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips--it was really very  good in its way, quite a suggestion.
I thought of telling the prophet  that art had a soul, but that man had not.
I am afraid, however, he  would not have understood me."    "Don't, Harry.
The soul is a terrible reality.
It can be bought, and  sold, and bartered away.
It can be poisoned, or made perfect.
There  is a soul in each one of us.
I know it."    "Do you feel quite sure of that, Dorian?"    "Quite sure."    "Ah! then it must be an illusion.
The things one feels absolutely  certain about are never true.
That is the fatality of faith, and the  lesson of romance.
How grave you are!  Don't be so serious.
What have  you or I to do with the superstitions of our age?
No:  we have given  up our belief in the soul.
Play me something.
Play me a nocturne,  Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept  your youth.
You must have some secret.
I am only ten years older than  you are, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow.
You are really  wonderful, Dorian.
You have never looked more charming than you do  to-night.
You remind me of the day I saw you first.
You were rather  cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary.
You have changed, of  course, but not in appearance.
I wish you would tell me your secret.
To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take  exercise, get up early, or be respectable.
Youth!  There is nothing  like it.
It's absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth.
The only  people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much  younger than myself.
They seem in front of me.
Life has revealed to  them her latest wonder.
As for the aged, I always contradict the aged.
I do it on principle.
If you ask them their opinion on something that  happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in  1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew  absolutely nothing.
How lovely that thing you are playing is!  I  wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weeping round the  villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes?
It is marvellously  romantic.
What a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that  is not imitative!  Don't stop.
I want music to-night.
It seems to me  that you are the young Apollo and that I am Marsyas listening to you.
I have sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of.
The  tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young.
I am  amazed sometimes at my own sincerity.
Ah, Dorian, how happy you are!  What an exquisite life you have had!  You have drunk deeply of  everything.
You have crushed the grapes against your palate.
Nothing  has been hidden from you.
And it has all been to you no more than the  sound of music.
It has not marred you.
You are still the same."    "I am not the same, Harry."    "Yes, you are the same.
I wonder what the rest of your life will be.
Don't spoil it by renunciations.
At present you are a perfect type.
Don't make yourself incomplete.
You are quite flawless now.
You need  not shake your head:  you know you are.
Besides, Dorian, don't deceive  yourself.
Life is not governed by will or intention.
Life is a  question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which  thought hides itself and passion has its dreams.
You may fancy  yourself safe and think yourself strong.
But a chance tone of colour  in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume that you had once  loved and that brings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten  poem that you had come across again, a cadence from a piece of music  that you had ceased to play--I tell you, Dorian, that it is on things  like these that our lives depend.
Browning writes about that  somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us.
There are  moments when the odour of _lilas blanc_ passes suddenly across me, and I  have to live the strangest month of my life over again.
I wish I could  change places with you, Dorian.
The world has cried out against us  both, but it has always worshipped you.
It always will worship you.
You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is  afraid it has found.
I am so glad that you have never done anything,  never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything  outside of yourself!  Life has been your art.
You have set yourself to  music.
Your days are your sonnets."    Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair.
"Yes, life has been exquisite," he murmured, "but I am not going to  have the same life, Harry.
And you must not say these extravagant  things to me.
You don't know everything about me.
I think that if you  did, even you would turn from me.
You laugh.
Don't laugh."    "Why have you stopped playing, Dorian?
Go back and give me the  nocturne over again.
Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that  hangs in the dusky air.
She is waiting for you to charm her, and if  you play she will come closer to the earth.
You won't?
Let us go to  the club, then.
It has been a charming evening, and we must end it  charmingly.
There is some one at White's who wants immensely to know  you--young Lord Poole, Bournemouth's eldest son.
He has already copied  your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you.
He is quite  delightful and rather reminds me of you."    "I hope not," said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes.
"But I am tired  to-night, Harry.
I shan't go to the club.
It is nearly eleven, and I  want to go to bed early."    "Do stay.
You have never played so well as to-night.
There was  something in your touch that was wonderful.
It had more expression  than I had ever heard from it before."    "It is because I am going to be good," he answered, smiling.
"I am a  little changed already."    "You cannot change to me, Dorian," said Lord Henry.
"You and I will  always be friends."    "Yet you poisoned me with a book once.
I should not forgive that.
Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one.
It  does harm."    "My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize.
You will soon be  going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people  against all the sins of which you have grown tired.
You are much too  delightful to do that.
Besides, it is no use.
You and I are what we  are, and will be what we will be.
As for being poisoned by a book,  there is no such thing as that.
Art has no influence upon action.
It  annihilates the desire to act.
It is superbly sterile.
The books that  the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame.
That is all.
But we won't discuss literature.
Come round to-morrow.
I  am going to ride at eleven.
We might go together, and I will take you  to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome.
She is a charming woman, and  wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.
Mind you come.
Or shall we lunch with our little duchess?
She says  she never sees you now.
Perhaps you are tired of Gladys?
I thought  you would be.
Her clever tongue gets on one's nerves.
Well, in any  case, be here at eleven."    "Must I really come, Harry?"    "Certainly.
The park is quite lovely now.
I don't think there have  been such lilacs since the year I met you."    "Very well.
I shall be here at eleven," said Dorian.
"Good night,  Harry."  As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he  had something more to say.
Then he sighed and went out.
It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and  did not even put his silk scarf round his throat.
As he strolled home,  smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him.
He  heard one of them whisper to the other, "That is Dorian Gray." He  remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared  at, or talked about.
He was tired of hearing his own name now.
Half  the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was  that no one knew who he was.
He had often told the girl whom he had  lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him.
He had  told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and  answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly.
What a  laugh she had!--just like a thrush singing.
And how pretty she had  been in her cotton dresses and her large hats!  She knew nothing, but  she had everything that he had lost.
When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him.
He sent  him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and  began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.
Was it really true that one could never change?
He felt a wild longing  for the unstained purity of his boyhood--his rose-white boyhood, as  Lord Henry had once called it.
He knew that he had tarnished himself,  filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he  had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible  joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had  been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to  shame.
But was it all irretrievable?
Was there no hope for him?
Ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that  the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the  unsullied splendour of eternal youth!  All his failure had been due to  that.
Better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure  swift penalty along with it.
There was purification in punishment.
Not "Forgive us our sins" but "Smite us for our iniquities" should be  the prayer of man to a most just God.
The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many  years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids  laughed round it as of old.
He took it up, as he had done on that  night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal  picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished  shield.
Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a  mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: "The world is changed  because you are made of ivory and gold.
The curves of your lips  rewrite history."  The phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated  them over and over to himself.
Then he loathed his own beauty, and  flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters  beneath his heel.
It was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty  and the youth that he had prayed for.
But for those two things, his  life might have been free from stain.
His beauty had been to him but a  mask, his youth but a mockery.
What was youth at best?
A green, an  unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts.
Why had he  worn its livery?
Youth had spoiled him.
It was better not to think of the past.
Nothing could alter that.
It  was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think.
James  Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard.
Alan Campbell  had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the  secret that he had been forced to know.
The excitement, such as it  was, over Basil Hallward's disappearance would soon pass away.
It was  already waning.
He was perfectly safe there.
Nor, indeed, was it the  death of Basil Hallward that weighed most upon his mind.
It was the  living death of his own soul that troubled him.
Basil had painted the  portrait that had marred his life.
He could not forgive him that.
It  was the portrait that had done everything.
Basil had said things to  him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience.
The  murder had been simply the madness of a moment.
As for Alan Campbell,  his suicide had been his own act.
He had chosen to do it.
It was  nothing to him.
A new life!  That was what he wanted.
That was what he was waiting  for.
Surely he had begun it already.
He had spared one innocent  thing, at any rate.
He would never again tempt innocence.
He would be  good.
As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in  the locked room had changed.
Surely it was not still so horrible as it  had been?
Perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel  every sign of evil passion from the face.
Perhaps the signs of evil  had already gone away.
He would go and look.
He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs.
As he unbarred the  door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face  and lingered for a moment about his lips.
Yes, he would be good, and  the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror  to him.
He felt as if the load had been lifted from him already.
He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and  dragged the purple hanging from the portrait.
A cry of pain and  indignation broke from him.
He could see no change, save that in the  eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of  the hypocrite.
The thing was still loathsome--more loathsome, if  possible, than before--and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed  brighter, and more like blood newly spilled.
Then he trembled.
Had it  been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed?
Or the  desire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry had hinted, with his mocking  laugh?
Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things  finer than we are ourselves?
Or, perhaps, all these?
And why was the  red stain larger than it had been?
It seemed to have crept like a  horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers.
There was blood on the  painted feet, as though the thing had dripped--blood even on the hand  that had not held the knife.
Confess?
Did it mean that he was to  confess?
To give himself up and be put to death?
He laughed.
He felt  that the idea was monstrous.
Besides, even if he did confess, who  would believe him?
There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere.
Everything belonging to him had been destroyed.
He himself had burned  what had been below-stairs.
The world would simply say that he was mad.
They would shut him up if he persisted in his story....
Yet it was  his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public  atonement.
There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to  earth as well as to heaven.
Nothing that he could do would cleanse him  till he had told his own sin.
His sin?
He shrugged his shoulders.
The death of Basil Hallward seemed very little to him.
He was thinking  of Hetty Merton.
For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul  that he was looking at.
Vanity?
Curiosity?
Hypocrisy?
Had there  been nothing more in his renunciation than that?
There had been  something more.
At least he thought so.
But who could tell?
...
No.  There had been nothing more.
Through vanity he had spared her.
In  hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness.
For curiosity's sake he  had tried the denial of self.
He recognized that now.
But this murder--was it to dog him all his life?
Was he always to be  burdened by his past?
Was he really to confess?
Never.
There was  only one bit of evidence left against him.
The picture itself--that  was evidence.
He would destroy it.
Why had he kept it so long?
Once  it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old.
Of  late he had felt no such pleasure.
It had kept him awake at night.
When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes  should look upon it.
It had brought melancholy across his passions.
Its mere memory had marred many moments of joy.
It had been like  conscience to him.
Yes, it had been conscience.
He would destroy it.
He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward.
He  had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it.
It  was bright, and glistened.
As it had killed the painter, so it would  kill the painter's work, and all that that meant.
It would kill the  past, and when that was dead, he would be free.
It would kill this  monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at  peace.
He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.
There was a cry heard, and a crash.
The cry was so horrible in its  agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms.
Two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked  up at the great house.
They walked on till they met a policeman and  brought him back.
The man rang the bell several times, but there was  no answer.
Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was  all dark.
After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico  and watched.
"Whose house is that, Constable?" asked the elder of the two gentlemen.
"Mr. Dorian Gray's, sir," answered the policeman.
They looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered.
One of  them was Sir Henry Ashton's uncle.
Inside, in the servants' part of the house, the half-clad domestics  were talking in low whispers to each other.
Old Mrs.
Leaf was crying  and wringing her hands.
Francis was as pale as death.
After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the  footmen and crept upstairs.
They knocked, but there was no reply.
They called out.
Everything was still.
Finally, after vainly trying  to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the  balcony.
The windows yielded easily--their bolts were old.
When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait  of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his  exquisite youth and beauty.
Lying on the floor was a dead man, in  evening dress, with a knife in his heart.
He was withered, wrinkled,  and loathsome of visage.
It was not till they had examined the rings  that they recognized who it was.